     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Select Sermons
      Creator(s): Edwards, Jonathan (1703-1758)
   CCEL Subjects: All; Classic; MP3; Sermons; Theology;
      LC Call no: BX7117 .E3
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Protestantism

                  Post-Reformation

                  Other Protestant denominations

                  Congregationalism
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 Select Sermons

  of

Jonathan Edwards
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1]Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God [2]mp3

   Deuteronomy 32:35 -- Their foot shall slide in due time.

   [3]A Divine and Supernatural Light... [4]mp3

   Matthew 16:17 -- And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art
   thou, Simon Barjona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto
   thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

   [5]Christ's Agony [6]mp3

   Luke 22:44 -- And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly, and his
   sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.

   [7]God's Sovereignty in the Salvation of Men [8]mp3

   Romans 9:18 -- Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
   whom he will he hardeneth.

   [9]God Glorified in Man's Dependence [10]mp3

   1 Corinthians 1:29, 30, 31 -- That no flesh should glory in his
   presence. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
   wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: that,
   according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the
   Lord.

   [11]True Saints, When Absent from the Body, are Present with the Lord
   [12]mp3

   2 Corinthians v. 3 -- We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be
   absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord.

   [13]The Importance and Advantage of a Thorough Knowledge of Divine
   Truth. [14]mp3

   Hebrews 5:12 -- For when, for the time, ye ought to be teachers, ye
   have need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the
   oracles of God; and are become such as have need of milk, and not of
   strong meat.

   [15]The Excellency of Christ [16]mp3

   Revelation 5:5-6 -- And one of the elders saith unto me, Weep not:
   behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, hath
   prevailed to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof. And I
   beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne, and of the four beasts,
   and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb as it had been slain.

   [17]Wicked Men Useful in Their Destruction Only

   Ezekiel 15:2-4 -- Son of man, What is the vine tree more than any tree?
   Or than a branch which is among the trees of the forest? Shall wood be
   taken thereof to do any work? Or will men take a pin of it to hang any
   vessel thereon? Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; The fire
   devoureth both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burnt: Is it meet
   for any work?

   [18]The Vain Self Flatteries of the Sinner [19]mp3

   Psalm 36:2 -- For he flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his
   iniquity be found to be hateful.

   [20]The Future Punishment of the Wicked

   Ezekiel 22:14 -- Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong
   in the days that I shall deal with thee? I the Lord save spoken it, and
   will do it.

   [21]Hypocrites Deficient in the Duty of Prayer [22]mp3

   Job 27:10 -- Will he always call upon God?

   [23]The Justice of God in the Damnation of Sinners [24]mp3

   Romans 3:19 -- That every mouth may be stopped.

   [25]Christian Knowledge [26]mp3

   Hebrews 5:12 -- For Then for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have
   need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the
   oracles of God; and are become such as have need of milk, and not of
   strong meat.

   [27]The Manner in Which the Salvation of the Soul is to be Sought
   [28]mp3

   Genesis 6:22 -- Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him,
   so did he.

   [29]Safety, Fulness, and Sweet Refreshment in Christ [30]mp3

   Isaiah 32:2 -- And a man shall be as an hiding-place from the wind, and
   a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the
   shadow of a great rock in a weary land.

   [31]Pardon for the Greatest Sinners [32]mp3

   Psalm 25:11 -- For thy name's sake, O Lord, pardon my iniquity; for it
   is great.

   [33]Pressing Into The Kingdom of God [34]mp3

   Luke 16:16 -- The law and the prophets were until John; since that time
   the kingdom of God is preached, and every man presseth into it.

   [35]Many Mansions [36]mp3

   John 14:2 -- In My Father's house are many mansions.
     __________________________________________________________________

                      Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God

  Jonathan Edwards (1703-1758)

    Enfield, Connecticut
    July 8, 1741

     Their foot shall slide in due time. Deuteronomy 32:35

   In this verse is threatened the vengeance of God on the wicked
   unbelieving Israelites, who were God's visible people, and who lived
   under the means of grace; but who, notwithstanding all God's wonderful
   works towards them, remained (as vers 28.) void of counsel, having no
   understanding in them. Under all the cultivations of heaven, they
   brought forth bitter and poisonous fruit; as in the two verses next
   preceding the text. -- The expression I have chosen for my text, their
   foot shall slide in due time, seems to imply the following things,
   relating to the punishment and destruction to which these wicked
   Israelites were exposed.
    1. That they were always exposed to destruction; as one that stands or
       walks in slippery places is always exposed to fall. This is implied
       in the manner of their destruction coming upon them, being
       represented by their foot sliding. The same is expressed, Psalm
       73:18. "Surely thou didst set them in slippery places; thou
       castedst them down into destruction."
    2. It implies, that they were always exposed to sudden unexpected
       destruction. As he that walks in slippery places is every moment
       liable to fall, he cannot foresee one moment whether he shall stand
       or fall the next; and when he does fall, he falls at once without
       warning: Which is also expressed in Psalm 73:18,19. "Surely thou
       didst set them in slippery places; thou castedst them down into
       destruction: How are they brought into desolation as in a moment!"
    3. Another thing implied is, that they are liable to fall of
       themselves, without being thrown down by the hand of another; as he
       that stands or walks on slippery ground needs nothing but his own
       weight to throw him down.
    4. That the reason why they are not fallen already and do not fall now
       is only that God's appointed time is not come. For it is said, that
       when that due time, or appointed time comes, their foot shall
       slide. Then they shall be left to fall, as they are inclined by
       their own weight. God will not hold them up in these slippery
       places any longer, but will let them go; and then, at that very
       instant, they shall fall into destruction; as he that stands on
       such slippery declining ground, on the edge of a pit, he cannot
       stand alone, when he is let go he immediately falls and is lost.

   The observation from the words that I would now insist upon is this. --
   "There is nothing that keeps wicked men at any one moment out of hell,
   but the mere pleasure of God." -- By the mere pleasure of God, I mean
   his sovereign pleasure, his arbitrary will, restrained by no
   obligation, hindered by no manner of difficulty, any more than if
   nothing else but God's mere will had in the least degree, or in any
   respect whatsoever, any hand in the preservation of wicked men one
   moment. -- The truth of this observation may appear by the following
   consideration.
    1. There is no want of power in God to cast wicked men into hell at
       any moment. Men's hands cannot be strong when God rises up. The
       strongest have no power to resist him, nor can any deliver out of
       his hands. -- He is not only able to cast wicked men into hell, but
       he can most easily do it. Sometimes an earthly prince meets with a
       great deal of difficulty to subdue a rebel, who has found means to
       fortify himself, and has made himself strong by the numbers of his
       followers. But it is not so with God. There is no fortress that is
       any defence from the power of God. Though hand join in hand, and
       vast multitudes of God's enemies combine and associate themselves,
       they are easily broken in pieces. They are as great heaps of light
       chaff before the whirlwind; or large quantities of dry stubble
       before devouring flames. We find it easy to tread on and crush a
       worm that we see crawling on the earth; so it is easy for us to cut
       or singe a slender thread that any thing hangs by: thus easy is it
       for God, when he pleases, to cast his enemies down to hell. What
       are we, that we should think to stand before him, at whose rebuke
       the earth trembles, and before whom the rocks are thrown down?
    2. They deserve to be cast into hell; so that divine justice never
       stands in the way, it makes no objection against God's using his
       power at any moment to destroy them. Yea, on the contrary, justice
       calls aloud for an infinite punishment of their sins. Divine
       justice says of the tree that brings forth such grapes of Sodom,
       "Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground?" Luke 13:7. The sword of
       divine justice is every moment brandished over their heads, and it
       is nothing but the hand of arbitrary mercy, and God's mere will,
       that holds it back.
    3. They are already under a sentence of condemnation to hell. They do
       not only justly deserve to be cast down thither, but the sentence
       of the law of God, that eternal and immutable rule of righteousness
       that God has fixed between him and mankind, is gone out against
       them, and stands against them; so that they are bound over already
       to hell. John 3:18. "He that believeth not is condemned already."
       So that every unconverted man properly belongs to hell; that is his
       place; from thence he is, John 8:23. "Ye are from beneath:" And
       thither he is bound; it is the place that justice, and God's word,
       and the sentence of his unchangeable law assign to him.
    4. They are now the objects of that very same anger and wrath of God,
       that is expressed in the torments of hell. And the reason why they
       do not go down to hell at each moment, is not because God, in whose
       power they are, is not then very angry with them; as he is with
       many miserable creatures now tormented in hell, who there feel and
       bear the fierceness of his wrath. Yea, God is a great deal more
       angry with great numbers that are now on earth: yea, doubtless,
       with many that are now in this congregation, who it may be are at
       ease, than he is with many of those who are now in the flames of
       hell.
       So that it is not because God is unmindful of their wickedness, and
       does not resent it, that he does not let loose his hand and cut
       them off. God is not altogether such an one as themselves, though
       they may imagine him to be so. The wrath of God burns against them,
       their damnation does not slumber; the pit is prepared, the fire is
       made ready, the furnace is now hot, ready to receive them; the
       flames do now rage and glow. The glittering sword is whet, and held
       over them, and the pit hath opened its mouth under them.
    5. The devil stands ready to fall upon them, and seize them as his
       own, at what moment God shall permit him. They belong to him; he
       has their souls in his possession, and under his dominion. The
       scripture represents them as his goods, Luke 11:12. The devils
       watch them; they are ever by them at their right hand; they stand
       waiting for them, like greedy hungry lions that see their prey, and
       expect to have it, but are for the present kept back. If God should
       withdraw his hand, by which they are restrained, they would in one
       moment fly upon their poor souls. The old serpent is gaping for
       them; hell opens its mouth wide to receive them; and if God should
       permit it, they would be hastily swallowed up and lost.
    6. There are in the souls of wicked men those hellish principles
       reigning, that would presently kindle and flame out into hell fire,
       if it were not for God's restraints. There is laid in the very
       nature of carnal men, a foundation for the torments of hell. There
       are those corrupt principles, in reigning power in them, and in
       full possession of them, that are seeds of hell fire. These
       principles are active and powerful, exceeding violent in their
       nature, and if it were not for the restraining hand of God upon
       them, they would soon break out, they would flame out after the
       same manner as the same corruptions, the same enmity does in the
       hearts of damned souls, and would beget the same torments as they
       do in them. The souls of the wicked are in scripture compared to
       the troubled sea, Isa. 57:20. For the present, God restrains their
       wickedness by his mighty power, as he does the raging waves of the
       troubled sea, saying, "Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further;"
       but if God should withdraw that restraining power, it would soon
       carry all before it. Sin is the ruin and misery of the soul; it is
       destructive in its nature; and if God should leave it without
       restraint, there would need nothing else to make the soul perfectly
       miserable. The corruption of the heart of man is immoderate and
       boundless in its fury; and while wicked men live here, it is like
       fire pent up by God's restraints, whereas if it were let loose, it
       would set on fire the course of nature; and as the heart is now a
       sink of sin, so if sin was not restrained, it would immediately
       turn the soul into fiery oven, or a furnace of fire and brimstone.
    7. It is no security to wicked men for one moment, that there are no
       visible means of death at hand. It is no security to a natural man,
       that he is now in health, and that he does not see which way he
       should now immediately go out of the world by any accident, and
       that there is no visible danger in any respect in his
       circumstances. The manifold and continual experience of the world
       in all ages, shows this is no evidence, that a man is not on the
       very brink of eternity, and that the next step will not be into
       another world. The unseen, unthought-of ways and means of persons
       going suddenly out of the world are innumerable and inconceivable.
       Unconverted men walk over the pit of hell on a rotten covering, and
       there are innumerable places in this covering so weak that they
       will not bear their weight, and these places are not seen. The
       arrows of death fly unseen at noon-day; the sharpest sight cannot
       discern them. God has so many different unsearchable ways of taking
       wicked men out of the world and sending them to hell, that there is
       nothing to make it appear, that God had need to be at the expense
       of a miracle, or go out of the ordinary course of his providence,
       to destroy any wicked man, at any moment. All the means that there
       are of sinners going out of the world, are so in God's hands, and
       so universally and absolutely subject to his power and
       determination, that it does not depend at all the less on the mere
       will of God, whether sinners shall at any moment go to hell, than
       if means were never made use of, or at all concerned in the case.
    8. Natural men's prudence and care to preserve their own lives, or the
       care of others to preserve them, do not secure them a moment. To
       this, divine providence and universal experience do also bear
       testimony. There is this clear evidence that men's own wisdom is no
       security to them from death; that if it were otherwise we should
       see some difference between the wise and politic men of the world,
       and others, with regard to their liableness to early and unexpected
       death: but how is it in fact? Eccles. 2:16. "How dieth the wise
       man? even as the fool."
    9. All wicked men's pains and contrivance which they use to escape
       hell, while they continue to reject Christ, and so remain wicked
       men, do not secure them from hell one moment. Almost every natural
       man that hears of hell, flatters himself that he shall escape it;
       he depends upon himself for his own security; he flatters himself
       in what he has done, in what he is now doing, or what he intends to
       do. Every one lays out matters in his own mind how he shall avoid
       damnation, and flatters himself that he contrives well for himself,
       and that his schemes will not fail. They hear indeed that there are
       but few saved, and that the greater part of men that have died
       heretofore are gone to hell; but each one imagines that he lays out
       matters better for his own escape than others have done. He does
       not intend to come to that place of torment; he says within
       himself, that he intends to take effectual care, and to order
       matters so for himself as not to fail.
       But the foolish children of men miserably delude themselves in
       their own schemes, and in confidence in their own strength and
       wisdom; they trust to nothing but a shadow. The greater part of
       those who heretofore have lived under the same means of grace, and
       are now dead, are undoubtedly gone to hell; and it was not because
       they were not as wise as those who are now alive: it was not
       because they did not lay out matters as well for themselves to
       secure their own escape. If we could speak with them, and inquire
       of them, one by one, whether they expected, when alive, and when
       they used to hear about hell, ever to be the subjects of misery: we
       doubtless, should hear one and another reply, "No, I never intended
       to come here: I had laid out matters otherwise in my mind; I
       thought I should contrive well for myself -- I thought my scheme
       good. I intended to take effectual care; but it came upon me
       unexpected; I did not look for it at that time, and in that manner;
       it came as a thief -- Death outwitted me: God's wrath was too quick
       for me. Oh, my cursed foolishness! I was flattering myself, and
       pleasing myself with vain dreams of what I would do hereafter; and
       when I was saying, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction came
       upon me."
   10. God has laid himself under no obligation, by any promise to keep
       any natural man out of hell one moment. God certainly has made no
       promises either of eternal life, or of any deliverance or
       preservation from eternal death, but what are contained in the
       covenant of grace, the promises that are given in Christ, in whom
       all the promises are yea and amen. But surely they have no interest
       in the promises of the covenant of grace who are not the children
       of the covenant, who do not believe in any of the promises, and
       have no interest in the Mediator of the covenant.

   So that, whatever some have imagined and pretended about promises made
   to natural men's earnest seeking and knocking, it is plain and
   manifest, that whatever pains a natural man takes in religion, whatever
   prayers he makes, till he believes in Christ, God is under no manner of
   obligation to keep him a moment from eternal destruction.

   So that, thus it is that natural men are held in the hand of God, over
   the pit of hell; they have deserved the fiery pit, and are already
   sentenced to it; and God is dreadfully provoked, his anger is as great
   towards them as to those that are actually suffering the executions of
   the fierceness of his wrath in hell, and they have done nothing in the
   least to appease or abate that anger, neither is God in the least bound
   by any promise to hold them up one moment; the devil is waiting for
   them, hell is gaping for them, the flames gather and flash about them,
   and would fain lay hold on them, and swallow them up; the fire pent up
   in their own hearts is struggling to break out: and they have no
   interest in any Mediator, there are no means within reach that can be
   any security to them. In short, they have no refuge, nothing to take
   hold of; all that preserves them every moment is the mere arbitrary
   will, and uncovenanted, unobliged forbearance of an incensed God.

  Application

   The use of this awful subject may be for awakening unconverted persons
   in this congregation. This that you have heard is the case of every one
   of you that are out of Christ. -- That world of misery, that lake of
   burning brimstone, is extended abroad under you. There is the dreadful
   pit of the glowing flames of the wrath of God; there is hell's wide
   gaping mouth open; and you have nothing to stand upon, nor any thing to
   take hold of; there is nothing between you and hell but the air; it is
   only the power and mere pleasure of God that holds you up.

   You probably are not sensible of this; you find you are kept out of
   hell, but do not see the hand of God in it; but look at other things,
   as the good state of your bodily constitution, your care of your own
   life, and the means you use for your own preservation. But indeed these
   things are nothing; if God should withdraw his hand, they would avail
   no more to keep you from falling, than the thin air to hold up a person
   that is suspended in it.

   Your wickedness makes you as it were heavy as lead, and to tend
   downwards with great weight and pressure towards hell; and if God
   should let you go, you would immediately sink and swiftly descend and
   plunge into the bottomless gulf, and your healthy constitution, and
   your own care and prudence, and best contrivance, and all your
   righteousness, would have no more influence to uphold you and keep you
   out of hell, than a spider's web would have to stop a falling rock.
   Were it not for the sovereign pleasure of God, the earth would not bear
   you one moment; for you are a burden to it; the creation groans with
   you; the creature is made subject to the bondage of your corruption,
   not willingly; the sun does not willingly shine upon you to give you
   light to serve sin and Satan; the earth does not willingly yield her
   increase to satisfy your lusts; nor is it willingly a stage for your
   wickedness to be acted upon; the air does not willingly serve you for
   breath to maintain the flame of life in your vitals, while you spend
   your life in the service of God's enemies. God's creatures are good,
   and were made for men to serve God with, and do not willingly subserve
   to any other purpose, and groan when they are abused to purposes so
   directly contrary to their nature and end. And the world would spew you
   out, were it not for the sovereign hand of him who hath subjected it in
   hope. There are the black clouds of God's wrath now hanging directly
   over your heads, full of the dreadful storm, and big with thunder; and
   were it not for the restraining hand of God, it would immediately burst
   forth upon you. The sovereign pleasure of God, for the present, stays
   his rough wind; otherwise it would come with fury, and your destruction
   would come like a whirlwind, and you would be like the chaff on the
   summer threshing floor.

   The wrath of God is like great waters that are dammed for the present;
   they increase more and more, and rise higher and higher, till an outlet
   is given; and the longer the stream is stopped, the more rapid and
   mighty is its course, when once it is let loose. It is true, that
   judgment against your evil works has not been executed hitherto; the
   floods of God's vengeance have been withheld; but your guilt in the
   mean time is constantly increasing, and you are every day treasuring up
   more wrath; the waters are constantly rising, and waxing more and more
   mighty; and there is nothing but the mere pleasure of God, that holds
   the waters back, that are unwilling to be stopped, and press hard to go
   forward. If God should only withdraw his hand from the flood-gate, it
   would immediately fly open, and the fiery floods of the fierceness and
   wrath of God, would rush forth with inconceivable fury, and would come
   upon you with omnipotent power; and if your strength were ten thousand
   times greater than it is, yea, ten thousand times greater than the
   strength of the stoutest, sturdiest devil in hell, it would be nothing
   to withstand or endure it.

   The bow of God's wrath is bent, and the arrow made ready on the string,
   and justice bends the arrow at your heart, and strains the bow, and it
   is nothing but the mere pleasure of God, and that of an angry God,
   without any promise or obligation at all, that keeps the arrow one
   moment from being made drunk with your blood. Thus all you that never
   passed under a great change of heart, by the mighty power of the Spirit
   of God upon your souls; all you that were never born again, and made
   new creatures, and raised from being dead in sin, to a state of new,
   and before altogether unexperienced light and life, are in the hands of
   an angry God. However you may have reformed your life in many things,
   and may have had religious affections, and may keep up a form of
   religion in your families and closets, and in the house of God, it is
   nothing but his mere pleasure that keeps you from being this moment
   swallowed up in everlasting destruction. However unconvinced you may
   now be of the truth of what you hear, by and by you will be fully
   convinced of it. Those that are gone from being in the like
   circumstances with you, see that it was so with them; for destruction
   came suddenly upon most of them; when they expected nothing of it, and
   while they were saying, Peace and safety: now they see, that those
   things on which they depended for peace and safety, were nothing but
   thin air and empty shadows.

   The God that holds you over the pit of hell, much as one holds a
   spider, or some loathsome insect over the fire, abhors you, and is
   dreadfully provoked: his wrath towards you burns like fire; he looks
   upon you as worthy of nothing else, but to be cast into the fire; he is
   of purer eyes than to bear to have you in his sight; you are ten
   thousand times more abominable in his eyes, than the most hateful
   venomous serpent is in ours. You have offended him infinitely more than
   ever a stubborn rebel did his prince; and yet it is nothing but his
   hand that holds you from falling into the fire every moment. It is to
   be ascribed to nothing else, that you did not go to hell the last
   night; that you was suffered to awake again in this world, after you
   closed your eyes to sleep. And there is no other reason to be given,
   why you have not dropped into hell since you arose in the morning, but
   that God's hand has held you up. There is no other reason to be given
   why you have not gone to hell, since you have sat here in the house of
   God, provoking his pure eyes by your sinful wicked manner of attending
   his solemn worship. Yea, there is nothing else that is to be given as a
   reason why you do not this very moment drop down into hell.

   O sinner! Consider the fearful danger you are in: it is a great furnace
   of wrath, a wide and bottomless pit, full of the fire of wrath, that
   you are held over in the hand of that God, whose wrath is provoked and
   incensed as much against you, as against many of the damned in hell.
   You hang by a slender thread, with the flames of divine wrath flashing
   about it, and ready every moment to singe it, and burn it asunder; and
   you have no interest in any Mediator, and nothing to lay hold of to
   save yourself, nothing to keep off the flames of wrath, nothing of your
   own, nothing that you ever have done, nothing that you can do, to
   induce God to spare you one moment. -- And consider here more
   particularly,
    1. Whose wrath it is: it is the wrath of the infinite God. If it were
       only the wrath of man, though it were of the most potent prince, it
       would be comparatively little to be regarded. The wrath of kings is
       very much dreaded, especially of absolute monarchs, who have the
       possessions and lives of their subjects wholly in their power, to
       be disposed of at their mere will. Prov. 20:2. "The fear of a king
       is as the roaring of a lion: Whoso provoketh him to anger, sinneth
       against his own soul." The subject that very much enrages an
       arbitrary prince, is liable to suffer the most extreme torments
       that human art can invent, or human power can inflict. But the
       greatest earthly potentates in their greatest majesty and strength,
       and when clothed in their greatest terrors, are but feeble,
       despicable worms of the dust, in comparison of the great and
       almighty Creator and King of heaven and earth. It is but little
       that they can do, when most enraged, and when they have exerted the
       utmost of their fury. All the kings of the earth, before God, are
       as grasshoppers; they are nothing, and less than nothing: both
       their love and their hatred is to be despised. The wrath of the
       great King of kings, is as much more terrible than theirs, as his
       majesty is greater. Luke 12:4,5. "And I say unto you, my friends,
       Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that, have no
       more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom you shall fear:
       fear him, which after he hath killed, hath power to cast into hell:
       yea, I say unto you, Fear him."
    2. It is the fierceness of his wrath that you are exposed to. We often
       read of the fury of God; as in Isa. 59:18. "According to their
       deeds, accordingly he will repay fury to his adversaries." So Isa.
       66:15. "For behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his
       chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his
       rebuke with flames of fire." And in many other places. So, Rev.
       19:15, we read of "the wine press of the fierceness and wrath of
       Almighty God." The words are exceeding terrible. If it had only
       been said, "the wrath of God," the words would have implied that
       which is infinitely dreadful: but it is "the fierceness and wrath
       of God." The fury of God! the fierceness of Jehovah! Oh, how
       dreadful that must be! Who can utter or conceive what such
       expressions carry in them! But it is also "the fierceness and wrath
       of almighty God." As though there would be a very great
       manifestation of his almighty power in what the fierceness of his
       wrath should inflict, as though omnipotence should be as it were
       enraged, and exerted, as men are wont to exert their strength in
       the fierceness of their wrath. Oh! then, what will be the
       consequence! What will become of the poor worms that shall suffer
       it! Whose hands can be strong? And whose heart can endure? To what
       a dreadful, inexpressible, inconceivable depth of misery must the
       poor creature be sunk who shall be the subject of this!
       Consider this, you that are here present, that yet remain in an
       unregenerate state. That God will execute the fierceness of his
       anger, implies, that he will inflict wrath without any pity. When
       God beholds the ineffable extremity of your case, and sees your
       torment to be so vastly disproportioned to your strength, and sees
       how your poor soul is crushed, and sinks down, as it were, into an
       infinite gloom; he will have no compassion upon you, he will not
       forbear the executions of his wrath, or in the least lighten his
       hand; there shall be no moderation or mercy, nor will God then at
       all stay his rough wind; he will have no regard to your welfare,
       nor be at all careful lest you should suffer too much in any other
       sense, than only that you shall not suffer beyond what strict
       justice requires. Nothing shall be withheld, because it is so hard
       for you to bear. Ezek. 8:18. "Therefore will I also deal in fury:
       mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; and though they
       cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet I will not hear them." Now
       God stands ready to pity you; this is a day of mercy; you may cry
       now with some encouragement of obtaining mercy. But when once the
       day of mercy is past, your most lamentable and dolorous cries and
       shrieks will be in vain; you will be wholly lost and thrown away of
       God, as to any regard to your welfare. God will have no other use
       to put you to, but to suffer misery; you shall be continued in
       being to no other end; for you will be a vessel of wrath fitted to
       destruction; and there will be no other use of this vessel, but to
       be filled full of wrath. God will be so far from pitying you when
       you cry to him, that it is said he will only "laugh and mock,"
       Prov. 1:25,26,etc.
       How awful are those words, Isa. 63:3, which are the words of the
       great God. "I will tread them in mine anger, and will trample them
       in my fury, and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments,
       and I will stain all my raiment." It is perhaps impossible to
       conceive of words that carry in them greater manifestations of
       these three things, viz. contempt, and hatred, and fierceness of
       indignation. If you cry to God to pity you, he will be so far from
       pitying you in your doleful case, or showing you the least regard
       or favour, that instead of that, he will only tread you under foot.
       And though he will know that you cannot bear the weight of
       omnipotence treading upon you, yet he will not regard that, but he
       will crush you under his feet without mercy; he will crush out your
       blood, and make it fly, and it shall be sprinkled on his garments,
       so as to stain all his raiment. He will not only hate you, but he
       will have you in the utmost contempt: no place shall be thought fit
       for you, but under his feet to be trodden down as the mire of the
       streets.
    3. The misery you are exposed to is that which God will inflict to
       that end, that he might show what that wrath of Jehovah is. God
       hath had it on his heart to show to angels and men, both how
       excellent his love is, and also how terrible his wrath is.
       Sometimes earthly kings have a mind to show how terrible their
       wrath is, by the extreme punishments they would execute on those
       that would provoke them. Nebuchadnezzar, that mighty and haughty
       monarch of the Chaldean empire, was willing to show his wrath when
       enraged with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; and accordingly gave
       orders that the burning fiery furnace should be heated seven times
       hotter than it was before; doubtless, it was raised to the utmost
       degree of fierceness that human art could raise it. But the great
       God is also willing to show his wrath, and magnify his awful
       majesty and mighty power in the extreme sufferings of his enemies.
       Rom. 9:22. "What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his
       power known, endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath
       fitted to destruction?" And seeing this is his design, and what he
       has determined, even to show how terrible the unrestrained wrath,
       the fury and fierceness of Jehovah is, he will do it to effect.
       There will be something accomplished and brought to pass that will
       be dreadful with a witness. When the great and angry God hath risen
       up and executed his awful vengeance on the poor sinner, and the
       wretch is actually suffering the infinite weight and power of his
       indignation, then will God call upon the whole universe to behold
       that awful majesty and mighty power that is to be seen in it. Isa.
       33:12-14. "And the people shall be as the burnings of lime, as
       thorns cut up shall they be burnt in the fire. Hear ye that are far
       off, what I have done; and ye that are near, acknowledge my might.
       The sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the
       hypocrites," etc.
       Thus it will be with you that are in an unconverted state, if you
       continue in it; the infinite might, and majesty, and terribleness
       of the omnipotent God shall be magnified upon you, in the ineffable
       strength of your torments. You shall be tormented in the presence
       of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb; and when you
       shall be in this state of suffering, the glorious inhabitants of
       heaven shall go forth and look on the awful spectacle, that they
       may see what the wrath and fierceness of the Almighty is; and when
       they have seen it, they will fall down and adore that great power
       and majesty. Isa. 66:23,24. "And it shall come to pass, that from
       one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all
       flesh come to worship before me, saith the Lord. And they shall go
       forth and look upon the carcasses of the men that have transgressed
       against me; for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire
       be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh."
    4. It is everlasting wrath. It would be dreadful to suffer this
       fierceness and wrath of Almighty God one moment; but you must
       suffer it to all eternity. There will be no end to this exquisite
       horrible misery. When you look forward, you shall see a long for
       ever, a boundless duration before you, which will swallow up your
       thoughts, and amaze your soul; and you will absolutely despair of
       ever having any deliverance, any end, any mitigation, any rest at
       all. You will know certainly that you must wear out long ages,
       millions of millions of ages, in wrestling and conflicting with
       this almighty merciless vengeance; and then when you have so done,
       when so many ages have actually been spent by you in this manner,
       you will know that all is but a point to what remains. So that your
       punishment will indeed be infinite. Oh, who can express what the
       state of a soul in such circumstances is! All that we can possibly
       say about it, gives but a very feeble, faint representation of it;
       it is inexpressible and inconceivable: For "who knows the power of
       God's anger?"

   How dreadful is the state of those that are daily and hourly in the
   danger of this great wrath and infinite misery! But this is the dismal
   case of every soul in this congregation that has not been born again,
   however moral and strict, sober and religious, they may otherwise be.
   Oh that you would consider it, whether you be young or old! There is
   reason to think, that there are many in this congregation now hearing
   this discourse, that will actually be the subjects of this very misery
   to all eternity. We know not who they are, or in what seats they sit,
   or what thoughts they now have. It may be they are now at ease, and
   hear all these things without much disturbance, and are now flattering
   themselves that they are not the persons, promising themselves that
   they shall escape. If we knew that there was one person, and but one,
   in the whole congregation, that was to be the subject of this misery,
   what an awful thing would it be to think of! If we knew who it was,
   what an awful sight would it be to see such a person! How might all the
   rest of the congregation lift up a lamentable and bitter cry over him!
   But, alas! instead of one, how many is it likely will remember this
   discourse in hell? And it would be a wonder, if some that are now
   present should not be in hell in a very short time, even before this
   year is out. And it would be no wonder if some persons, that now sit
   here, in some seats of this meeting-house, in health, quiet and secure,
   should be there before tomorrow morning. Those of you that finally
   continue in a natural condition, that shall keep out of hell longest
   will be there in a little time! your damnation does not slumber; it
   will come swiftly, and, in all probability, very suddenly upon many of
   you. You have reason to wonder that you are not already in hell. It is
   doubtless the case of some whom you have seen and known, that never
   deserved hell more than you, and that heretofore appeared as likely to
   have been now alive as you. Their case is past all hope; they are
   crying in extreme misery and perfect despair; but here you are in the
   land of the living and in the house of God, and have an opportunity to
   obtain salvation. What would not those poor damned hopeless souls give
   for one day's opportunity such as you now enjoy!

   And now you have an extraordinary opportunity, a day wherein Christ has
   thrown the door of mercy wide open, and stands in calling and crying
   with a loud voice to poor sinners; a day wherein many are flocking to
   him, and pressing into the kingdom of God. Many are daily coming from
   the east, west, north and south; many that were very lately in the same
   miserable condition that you are in, are now in a happy state, with
   their hearts filled with love to him who has loved them, and washed
   them from their sins in his own blood, and rejoicing in hope of the
   glory of God. How awful is it to be left behind at such a day! To see
   so many others feasting, while you are pining and perishing! To see so
   many rejoicing and singing for joy of heart, while you have cause to
   mourn for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of spirit! How can you
   rest one moment in such a condition? Are not your souls as precious as
   the souls of the people at Suffield, where they are flocking from day
   to day to Christ?

   Are there not many here who have lived long in the world, and are not
   to this day born again? and so are aliens from the commonwealth of
   Israel, and have done nothing ever since they have lived, but treasure
   up wrath against the day of wrath? Oh, sirs, your case, in an especial
   manner, is extremely dangerous. Your guilt and hardness of heart is
   extremely great. Do you not see how generality persons of your years
   are passed over and left, in the present remarkable and wonderful
   dispensation of God's mercy? You had need to consider yourselves, and
   awake thoroughly out of sleep. You cannot bear the fierceness and wrath
   of the infinite God. -- And you, young men, and young women, will you
   neglect this precious season which you now enjoy, when so many others
   of your age are renouncing all youthful vanities, and flocking to
   Christ? You especially have now an extraordinary opportunity; but if
   you neglect it, it will soon be with you as with those persons who
   spent all the precious days of youth in sin, and are now come to such a
   dreadful pass in blindness and hardness. -- And you, children, who are
   unconverted, do not you know that you are going down to hell, to bear
   the dreadful wrath of that God, who is now angry with you every day and
   every night? Will you be content to be the children of the devil, when
   so many other children in the land are converted, and are become the
   holy and happy children of the King of kings?

   And let every one that is yet out of Christ, and hanging over the pit
   of hell, whether they be old men and women, or middle aged, or young
   people, or little children, now hearken to the loud calls of God's word
   and providence. This acceptable year of the Lord, a day of such great
   favour to some, will doubtless be a day of as remarkable vengeance to
   others. Men's hearts harden, and their guilt increases apace at such a
   day as this, if they neglect their souls; and never was there so great
   danger of such persons being given up to hardness of heart and
   blindness of mind. God seems now to be hastily gathering in his elect
   in all parts of the land; and probably the greater part of adult
   persons that ever shall be saved, will be brought in now in a little
   time, and that it will be as it was on the great out-pouring of the
   Spirit upon the Jews in the apostles' days; the election will obtain,
   and the rest will be blinded. If this should be the case with you, you
   will eternally curse this day, and will curse the day that ever you was
   born, to see such a season of the pouring out of God's Spirit, and will
   wish that you had died and gone to hell before you had seen it. Now
   undoubtedly it is, as it was in the days of John the Baptist, the axe
   is in an extraordinary manner laid at the root of the trees, that every
   tree which brings not forth good fruit, may be hewn down and cast into
   the fire.

   Therefore, let every one that is out of Christ, now awake and fly from
   the wrath to come. The wrath of Almighty God is now undoubtedly hanging
   over a great part of this congregation. Let every one fly out of Sodom:
   "Haste and escape for your lives, look not behind you, escape to the
   mountain, lest you be consumed."
     __________________________________________________________________

                        A Divine and Supernatural Light,

                        Immediately Imparted to the Soul

                             by the Spirit of God,

               Shown to be Both Scriptural and Rational Doctrine

A Sermon

  by

Jonathan Edwards

      [Preached at Northampton, and published at the desire of some of the
      hearers, in the year 1734.]

   Matthew 16:17 - And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou,
   Simon Barjona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but
   my Father which is in heaven.

   CHRIST says these words to Peter upon occasion of his professing his
   faith in him as the Son of God. Our Lord was inquiring of his
   disciples, who men said he was; not that he needed to be informed, but
   only to introduce and give occasion to what follows. They answer, that
   some said he was John the Baptist, and some Elias, and others Jeremias,
   or one of the Prophets. When they had thus given an account who others
   said he was, Christ asks them, who they said he was? Simon Peter, whom
   we find always zealous and forward, was the first to answer: he readily
   replied to the question, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God.

   Upon this occasion, Christ says as he does to him, and of him in the
   text: in which we may observe,

   1. That Peter is pronounced blessed on this account. Blessed art thou
   -- "Thou art a happy man, that thou art not ignorant of this, that I am
   Christ, the Son of the living God. Thou art distinguishingly happy.
   Others are blinded, and have dark and deluded apprehensions, as you
   have now given an account, some thinking that I am Elias, and some that
   I am Jeremias, and some one thing, and some another; but none of them
   thinking right, all of them misled. Happy art thou, that art so
   distinguished as to know the truth in this matter." 2. The evidence of
   this his happiness declared; viz., that God, and he only, had revealed
   it to him. This is an evidence of his being blessed.

   First, As it shows how peculiarly favored he was of God above others;
   q.d., "How highly favored art thou, that others that are wise and great
   men, the Scribes, Pharisees, and Rulers, and the nation in general, are
   left in darkness, to follow their own misguided apprehensions; and that
   thou shouldst be singled out, as it were, by name, that my Heavenly
   Father should thus set his love, on thee, Simon Bar-jona. This argues
   thee blessed, that thou shouldst thus be the object of God's
   distinguishing love."

   Secondly, It evidences his blessedness also, as it intimates that this
   knowledge is above any that flesh and blood can reveal. "This is such
   knowledge as only my Father which is in heaven can give: it is too high
   and excellent to be communicated by such means as other knowledge is.
   Thou art blessed, that thou knowest that which God alone can teach
   thee."

   The original of this knowledge is here declared, both negatively and
   positively. Positively, as God is here declared the author of it.
   Negatively, as it is declared, that flesh and blood had not revealed
   it. God is the author of all knowledge and understanding whatsoever. He
   is the author of the knowledge that is obtained by human learning: he
   is the author of all moral prudence, and of the knowledge and skill
   that men have in their secular business. Thus it is said of all in
   Israel that were wise-hearted, and skilled in embroidering, that God
   had filled them with the spirit of wisdom, Exodus 28:3.

   God is the author of such knowledge; but yet not so but that flesh and
   blood reveals it. Mortal men are capable of imparting the knowledge of
   human arts and sciences, and skill in temporal affairs. God is the
   author of such knowledge by those means: flesh and blood is employed as
   the mediate or second cause of it; he conveys it by the power and
   influence of natural means. But this spiritual knowledge, spoken of in
   the text, is what God is the author of, and none else: he reveals it,
   and flesh and blood reveals it not. He imparts this knowledge
   immediately, not making use of any intermediate natural causes, as he
   does in other knowledge.

   What had passed in the preceding discourse naturally occasioned Christ
   to observe this; because the disciples had been telling how others did
   not know him, but were generally mistaken about him, and divided and
   confounded in their opinions of him: but Peter had declared his assured
   faith, that he was the Son of God. Now it was natural to observe, how
   it was not flesh and blood that had revealed it to him, but God: for if
   this knowledge were dependent on natural causes or means, how came it
   to pass that they, a company of poor fishermen, illiterate men, and
   persons of low education, attained to the knowledge of the truth; while
   the Scribes and Pharisees, men of vastly higher advantages, and greater
   knowledge and sagacity in other matters, remained in ignorance? This
   could be owing only to the gracious distinguishing influence and
   revelation of the Spirit of God. Hence, what I would make the subject
   of my present discourse from these words, is this

    DOCTRINE

   That there is such a thing as a spiritual and divine light immediately
   imparted to the soul by God, of a different nature from any that is
   obtained by natural means.--And on this subject I would,

   I. Show what this divine light is.

   II. How it is given immediately by God, and not obtained by natural
   means.

   III. Show the truth of the doctrine.
   And then conclude with a brief improvement.

   I. I would show what this spiritual and divine light is. And in order
   to it, would show,

   First, In a few things what it is not. And here,

   1. Those convictions that natural men may have of their sin and misery,
   is not this spiritual and divine light. Men in a natural condition may
   have convictions of the guilt that lies upon them, and of the anger of
   God, and their danger of divine vengeance. Such convictions are from
   light or sensibleness of truth. That some sinners have a greater
   conviction of their guilt and misery than others, is because some have
   more light, or more of an apprehension of truth than others. And this
   light and conviction may be from the Spirit of God; the Spirit
   convinces men of sin: but yet nature is much more concerned in it than
   in the communication of that spiritual and divine light that is spoken
   of in the doctrine; it is from the Spirit of God only as assisting
   natural principles, and not as infusing any new principles. Common
   grace differs from special, in that it influences only by assisting of
   nature; and not by imparting grace, or bestowing any thing above
   nature. The light that is obtained is wholly natural, or of no superior
   kind to what mere nature attains to, though more of that kind be
   obtained than would be obtained if men were left wholly to themselves:
   or, in other words, common grace only assists the faculties of the soul
   to do that more fully which they do by nature, as natural conscience or
   reason will, by mere nature, make a man sensible of guilt, and will
   accuse and condemn him when he has done amiss. Conscience is a
   principle natural to men; and the work that it doth naturally, or of
   itself, is to give an apprehension of right and wrong, and to suggest
   to the mind the relation that there is between right and wrong, and a
   retribution. The Spirit of God, in those convictions which unregenerate
   men sometimes have, assists conscience to do this work in a further
   degree than it would do if they were left to themselves: he helps it
   against those things that tend to stupify it, and obstruct its
   exercise. But in the renewing and sanctifying work of the Holy Ghost,
   those things are wrought in the soul that are above nature, and of
   which there is nothing of the like kind in the soul by nature; and they
   are caused to exist in the soul habitually, and according to such a
   stated constitution or law that lays such a foundation for exercises in
   a continued course, as is called a principle of nature. Not only are
   remaining principles assisted to do their work more freely and fully,
   but those principles are restored that were utterly destroyed by the
   fall; and the mind thence forward habitually exerts those acts that the
   dominion of sin had made it as wholly destitute of, as a dead body is
   of vital acts.

   The Spirit of God acts in a very different manner in the one case, from
   what he doth in the other. He may indeed act upon the mind of a natural
   man, but he acts in the mind of a saint as an indwelling vital
   principle. He acts upon the mind of an unregenerate person as an
   extrinsic, occasional agent; for in acting upon them, he doth not unite
   himself to them; for notwithstanding all his influences that they may
   be the subjects of, they are still sensual, having not the Spirit, Jude
   19. But he unites himself with the mind of a saint, takes him for his
   temple, actuates and influences him as a new supernatural principle of
   life and action. There is this difference, that the Spirit of God, in
   acting in the soul of a godly man, exerts and communicates himself
   there in his own proper nature. Holiness is the proper nature of the
   Spirit of God. The Holy Spirit operates in the minds of the godly, by
   uniting himself to them, and living in them, and exerting his own
   nature in the exercise of their faculties. The Spirit of God may act
   upon a creature, and yet not in acting communicate himself. The Spirit
   of God may act upon inanimate creatures; as, the Spirit moved upon the
   face of the waters, in the beginning of the creation; so the Spirit of
   God may act upon the minds of men many ways, and communicate himself no
   more than when he acts upon an inanimate creature. For instance, he may
   excite thoughts in them, may assist their natural reason and
   understanding, or may assist other natural principles, and this without
   any union with the soul, but may act, as it were, as upon an external
   object. But as he acts in his holy influences and spiritual operations,
   he acts in a way of peculiar communication of himself; so that the
   subject is thence denominated spiritual.

   2. This spiritual and divine light does not consist in any impression
   made upon the imagination. It is no impression upon the mind, as though
   one saw any thing with the bodily eyes: it is no imagination or idea of
   an outward light or glory, or any beauty of form or countenance, or a
   visible lustre or brightness of any object. The imagination may be
   strongly impressed with such things; but this is not spiritual light.
   Indeed when the mind has a lively discovery of spiritual things, and is
   greatly affected by the power of divine light, it may, and probably
   very commonly doth, much affect the imagination; so that impressions of
   an outward beauty or brightness may accompany those spiritual
   discoveries. But spiritual light is not that impression upon the
   imagination, but an exceeding different thing from it. Natural men may
   have lively impressions on their imaginations; and we cannot determine
   but the devil, who transforms himself into an angel of light, may cause
   imaginations of an outward beauty, or visible glory, and of sounds and
   speeches, and other such things; but these are things of a vastly
   inferior nature to spiritual light.

   3. This spiritual light is not the suggesting of any new truths or
   propositions not contained in the word of God. This suggesting of new
   truths or doctrines to the mind, independent of any antecedent
   revelation of those propositions, either in word or writing, is
   inspiration; such as the prophets and apostles had, and such as some
   enthusiasts pretend to. But this spiritual light that I am speaking of,
   is quite a different thing from inspiration: it reveals no new
   doctrine, it suggests no new proposition to the mind, it teaches no new
   thing of God, or Christ, or another world, not taught in the Bible, but
   only gives a due apprehension of those things that are taught in the
   word of God.

   4. It is not every affecting view that men have of the things of
   religion that is this spiritual and divine light. Men by mere
   principles of nature are capable of being affected with things that
   have a special relation to religion as well as other things. A person
   by mere nature, for instance, may be liable to be affected with the
   story of Jesus Christ, and the sufferings he underwent, as well as by
   any other tragical story: he may be the more affected with it from the
   interest he conceives mankind to have in it: yea, he may be affected
   with it without believing it; as well as a man may be affected with
   what he reads in a romance, or sees acted in a stage play. He may be
   affected with a lively and eloquent description of many pleasant things
   that attend the state of the blessed in heaven, as well as his
   imagination be entertained by a romantic description of the
   pleasantness of fairy land, or the like. And that common belief of the
   truth of the things of religion, that persons may have from education
   or otherwise, may help forward their affection. We read in Scripture of
   many that were greatly affected with things of a religious nature, who
   yet are there represented as wholly graceless, and many of them very
   ill men. A person therefore may have affecting views of the things of
   religion, and yet be very destitute of spiritual light. Flesh and blood
   may be the author of this: one man may give another an affecting view
   of divine things with but common assistance: but God alone can give a
   spiritual discovery of them. -- But I proceed to show,

   Secondly, Positively what this spiritual and divine light is.

   And it may be thus described: a true sense of the divine excellency of
   the things revealed in the word of God, and a conviction of the truth
   and reality of them thence arising. This spiritual light primarily
   consists in the former of these, viz., a real sense and apprehension of
   the divine excellency of things revealed in the word of God. A
   spiritual and saving conviction of the truth and reality of these
   things, arises from such a sight of their divine excellency and glory;
   so that this conviction of their truth is an effect and natural
   consequence of this sight of their divine glory. There is therefore in
   this spiritual light,

   1. A true sense of the divine and superlative excellency of the things
   of religion; a real sense of the excellency of God and Jesus Christ,
   and of the work of redemption, and the ways and works of God revealed
   in the gospel. There is a divine and superlative glory in these things;
   an excellency that is of a vastly higher kind, and more sublime nature
   than in other things; a glory greatly distinguishing them from all that
   is earthly and temporal. He that is spiritually enlightened truly
   apprehends and sees it, or has a sense of it. He does not merely
   rationally believe that God is glorious, but he has a sense of the
   gloriousness of God in his heart. There is not only a rational belief
   that God is holy, and that holiness is a good thing, but there is a
   sense of the loveliness of God's holiness. There is not only a
   speculatively judging that God is gracious, but a sense how amiable God
   is upon that account, or a sense of the beauty of this divine
   attribute.

   There is a twofold understanding or knowledge of good that God has made
   the mind of man capable of. The first, that which is merely speculative
   and notional; as when a person only speculatively judges that any thing
   is, which, by the agreement of mankind, is called good or excellent,
   viz., that which is most to general advantage, and between which and a
   reward there is a suitableness, and the like. And the other is, that
   which consists in the sense of the heart: as when there is a sense of
   the beauty, amiableness, or sweetness of a thing; so that the heart is
   sensible of pleasure and delight in the presence of the idea of it. In
   the former is exercised merely the speculative faculty, or the
   understanding, strictly so called, or as spoken of in distinction from
   the will or disposition of the soul. In the latter, the will, or
   inclination, or heart, are mainly concerned.

   Thus there is a difference between having an opinion, that God is holy
   and gracious, and having a sense of the loveliness and beauty of that
   holiness and grace. There is a difference between having a rational
   judgment that honey is sweet, and having a sense of its sweetness. A
   man may have the former, that knows not how honey tastes; but a man
   cannot have the latter unless he has an idea of the taste of honey in
   his mind. So there is a difference between believing that a person is
   beautiful, and having a sense of his beauty. The former may be obtained
   by hearsay, but the latter only by seeing the countenance. There is a
   wide difference between mere speculative rational judging any thing to
   be excellent, and having a sense of its sweetness and beauty. The
   former rests only in the head, speculation only is concerned in it; but
   the heart is concerned in the latter. When the heart is sensible of the
   beauty and amiableness of a thing, it necessarily feels pleasure in the
   apprehension. It is implied in a person's being heartily sensible of
   the loveliness of a thing, that the idea of it is sweet and pleasant to
   his soul; which is a far different thing from having a rational opinion
   that it is excellent.

   2. There arises from this sense of divine excellency of things
   contained in the word of God, a conviction of the truth and reality of
   them; and that either directly or indirectly.

   First, Indirectly, and that two ways.

   1. As the prejudices that are in the heart, against the truth of divine
   things, are hereby removed; so that the mind becomes susceptive of the
   due force of rational arguments for their truth. The mind of man is
   naturally full of prejudices against the truth of divine things: it is
   full of enmity against the doctrines of the gospel; which is a
   disadvantage to those arguments that prove their truth, and causes them
   to lose their force upon the mind. But when a person has discovered to
   him the divine excellency of Christian doctrines, this destroys the
   enmity, removes those prejudices, and sanctifies the reason, and causes
   it to lie open to the force of arguments for their truth.

   Hence was the different effect that Christ's miracles had to convince
   the disciples from what they had to convince the Scribes and Pharisees.
   Not that they had a stronger reason, or had their reason more improved;
   but their reason was sanctified, and those blinding prejudices, that
   the Scribes and Pharisees were under, were removed by the sense they
   had of the excellency of Christ and his doctrine.

   2. It not only removes the hinderances of reason, but positively helps
   reason. It makes even the speculative notions the more lively. It
   engages the attention of the mind, with the fixedness and intenseness
   to that kind of objects; which causes it to have a clearer view of
   them, and enables it more clearly to see their mutual relations, and
   occasions it to take more notice of them. The ideas themselves that
   otherwise are dim and obscure, are by this means impressed with the
   greater strength, and have a light cast upon them; so that the mind can
   better judge of them. As he that beholds the objects on the face of the
   earth, when the light of the sun is cast upon them; so that the mind
   can better judge of them. As he that beholds the objects on the face of
   the earth, when the light of the sun is cast upon them, is under
   greater advantage to discern them in their true forms and mutual
   relations, than he that sees them in a dim starlight or twilight.

   The mind having a sensibleness of the excellency of divine objects,
   dwells upon them with delight; and the powers of the soul are more
   awakened and enlivened to employ themselves in the contemplation of
   them, and exert themselves more fully and much more to the purpose. The
   beauty and sweetness of the objects draws on the faculties, and draws
   forth their exercises: so that reason itself is under far greater
   advantages for its proper and free exercises, and to attain its proper
   end, free of darkness and delusion. -- But,

   Secondly, A true sense of the divine excellency of the things of God's
   word doth more directly and immediately convince of the truth of them;
   and that because the excellency of these things is so superlative.
   There is a beauty in them that is so divine and godlike, that is
   greatly and evidently distinguishing of them from things merely human,
   or that men are the inventors and authors of; a glory that is so high
   and great, that when clearly seen, commands assent to their divinity
   and reality. When there is an actual and lively discovery of this
   beauty and excellency, it will not allow of any such thought as that it
   is a human work, or the fruit of men's invention. This evidence that
   they that are spiritually enlightened have of the truth of the things
   of religion, is a kind of intuitive and immediate evidence. They
   believe the doctrines of God's word to be divine, because they see
   divinity in them; i.e., they see a divine, and transcendent, and most
   evidently distinguishing glory in them; such a glory as, if clearly
   seen, does not leave room to doubt of their being of God, and not of
   men.

   Such a conviction of the truth of religion as this, arising, these
   ways, from a sense of the divine excellency of them, is that true
   spiritual conviction that there is in saving faith. And this original
   of it, is that by which it is most essentially distinguished from that
   common assent, which unregenerate men are capable of.

   II. I proceed now to the second thing proposed, viz., to show how this
   light is immediately given by God, and not obtained by natural means.
   And here,

   1. It is not intended that the natural faculties are not made use of in
   it. The natural faculties are the subject of this light: and they are
   the subject in such a manner, that they are not merely passive, but
   active in it; the acts and exercises of man's understanding are
   concemed and made use of in it. God, in letting in this light into the
   soul, deals with man according to his nature, or as a rational
   creature; and makes use of his human faculties. But yet this light is
   not the less immediately from God for that; though the faculties are
   made use of, it is as the subject and not as the cause; and that acting
   of the faculties in it, is not the cause, but is either implied in the
   thing itself (in the light that is imparted) or is the consequence of
   it. As the use that we make of our eyes in beholding various objects,
   when the sun arises, is not the cause of the light that discovers those
   objects to us.

   2. It is not intended that outward means have no concern in this
   affair. As I have observed already, it is not in this affair, as it is
   in inspiration, where new truths are suggested: for here is by this
   light only given a due apprehension of the same truths that are
   revealed in the word of God; and therefore it is not given without the
   word. The gospel is made use of in this affair: this light is the
   "light of the glorious gospel of Christ", 2 Cor. 4:4. The gospel is as
   a glass by which this light is conveyed to us, 1 Cor. 13:12. "Now we
   see through a glass." -- But,

   3. When it is said that this light is given immediately by God, and not
   obtained by natural means, hereby is intended, that it is given by God
   without making use of any means that operate by their own power, or a
   natural force God makes use of means; but it is not as mediate causes
   to produce this effect. There are not truly any second causes of it;
   but it is produced by God immediately. The word of God is no proper
   cause of this effect: it does not operate by any natural force in it.
   The word of God is only made use of to convey to the mind the subject
   matter of this saving instruction: and this indeed it doth convey to us
   by natural force or influence. It conveys to our minds these and those
   doctrines; it is the cause of the notion of them in our heads, but not
   of the sense of the divine excellency of them in our hearts. Indeed a
   person cannot have spiritual light without the word. But that does not
   argue, that the word properly causes that light. The mind cannot see
   the excellency of any doctrine, unless that doctrine be first in the
   mind; but the seeing of the excellency of the doctrine may be
   immediately from the Spirit of God; though the conveying of the
   doctrine or proposition itself may be by the word. So that the notions
   that are the subject matter of this light, are conveyed to the mind by
   the word of God; but that due sense of the heart, wherein this light
   formally consists, is immediately by the Spirit of God. As for
   instance, that notion that there is a Christ, and that Christ is holy
   and gracious, is conveyed to the mind by the word of God: but the sense
   of the excellency of Christ by reason of that holiness and grace, is
   nevertheless immediately the work of the Holy Spirit. -- I come now,

   III. To show the truth of the doctrine; that is, to show that there is
   such a thing as that spiritual light that has been described, thus
   immediately let into the mind by God. And here I would show briefly,
   that this doctrine is both scriptural and rational.

   First, It is scriptural. My text is not only full to the purpose, but
   it is a doctrine that the Scripture abounds in. We are there abundantly
   taught, that the saints differ from the ungodly in this, that they have
   the knowledge of God, and a sight of God, and of Jesus Christ. I shall
   mention but few texts of many. 1 John 3:6, "Whosoever sinneth, has not
   seen him, nor known him." 3 John 11, "He that doth good, is of God: but
   he that doth evil, hath not seen God." John 14:19, "The world seeth me
   no more; but ye see me." John 17:3, "And this is eternal life, that
   they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
   hast sent." This knowledge, or sight of God and Christ, cannot be a
   mere speculative knowledge; because it is spoken of as a seeing and
   knowing, wherein they differ from the ungodly. And by these Scriptures
   it must not only be a different knowledge in degree and circumstances,
   and different in its effects; but it must be entirely different in
   nature and kind.

   And this light and knowledge is always spoken of as immediately given
   of God, Matt. 11:25-27: "At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank
   thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these
   things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.
   Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. All things are
   delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knoweth the Son but the
   Father: neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to
   whomsoever the Son will reveal him." Here this effect is ascribed alone
   to the arbitrary operation, and gift of God, bestowing this knowledge
   on whom he will, and distinguishing those with it, that have the least
   natural advantage or means for knowledge, even babes, when it is denied
   to the wise and prudent. And the imparting of the knowledge of God is
   here appropriated to the Son of God, as his sole prerogative. And
   again, 2 Cor. 4:6, "For God, who commanded the light to shine out of
   darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge
   of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ." This plainly shows,
   that there is such a thing as a discovery of the divine superlative
   glory and excellency of God and Christ, and that peculiar to the
   saints: and also, that it is as immediately from God, as light from the
   sun: and that it is the immediate effect of his power and will; for it
   is compared to God's creating the light by his powerful word in the
   beginning of the creation; and is said to be by the Spirit of the Lord,
   in the 18th verse of the preceding chapter. God is spoken of as giving
   the knowledge of Christ in conversion, as of what before was hidden and
   unseen in that. Gal. 1:15,16, "But when it pleased God, who separated
   me from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his Son
   in me." The Scripture also speaks plainly of such a knowledge of the
   word of God, as has been described, as the immediate gift of God, Psalm
   119:18: "Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of
   thy law." What could the Psalmist mean when he begged of God to open
   his eyes? Was he ever blind? Might he not have resort to the law and
   see every word and sentence in it when he pleased? and what could he
   mean by those wondrous things? Was it the wonderful stories of the
   creation, and deluge, and Israel's passing through the Red Sea, and the
   like? Were not his eyes open to read these strange things when he
   would? Doubtless by wondrous things in God's law, he had respect to
   those distinguishing and wonderful excellencies, and marvellous
   manifestations of the divine perfections, and glory, that there was in
   the commands and doctrines of the word, and those works and counsels of
   God that were there revealed. So the Scripture speaks of a knowledge of
   God's dispensation, and covenant of mercy, and way of grace towards his
   people, as peculiar to the saints, and given only by God, Psalm 25:14:
   "The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he will show
   them his covenant."

   And that a true and saving belief of the truth of religion is that
   which arises from such a discovery, is also what the Scripture teaches.
   As John 6:40, "And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one
   which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life;"
   where it is plain that a true faith is what arises from a spiritual
   sight of Christ. and John 17:6,7,8, "I have manifested thy name unto
   the men which thou gavest me out of the world. Now they have known that
   all things whatsoever thou hast given me, are of thee. For I have given
   unto them the words which thou gavest me; and they have received them,
   and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed
   that thou didst send me;" where Christ's manifesting God's name to the
   disciples, or giving them the knowledge of God, was that whereby they
   knew that Christ's doctrine was of God, and that Christ himself was of
   him, proceeded from him, and was sent by him. Again, John 12:44,45,46,
   "Jesus cried and said, He that believeth on me, believeth not on me,
   but on him that sent me. And he that seeth me, seeth him that sent me.
   I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me,
   should not abide in darkness." Their believing in Christ, and
   spiritually seeing him, are spoken of as running parallel.

   Christ condemns the Jews that they did not know that he was the
   Messiah, and that his doctrine was true, from an inward distinguishing
   taste and relish of what was divine, in Luke 12:56,57. He having there
   blamed the Jews, that though they could discern the face of the sky and
   of the earth, and signs of the weather, that yet they could not discern
   those times; or as it is expressed in Matthew, the signs of those
   times; he adds, yea, and why even of your own selves, judge ye not what
   is right? i.e., without extrinsic signs. Why have ye not that sense of
   true excellency, whereby ye may distinguish that which is holy and
   divine? Why have ye not that savor of the things of God, by which you
   may see the distinguishing glory, and evident divinity of me and my
   doctrine?

   The Apostle Peter mentions it as what gave them (the apostles) good and
   well grounded assurance of the truth of the gospel, that they had seen
   the divine glory of Christ. 2 Pet. 1:16, "For we have not followed
   cunningly devised fables when we made known unto you the power and
   coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty."
   The apostle has respect to that visible glory of Christ which they saw
   in his transfiguration: that glory was so divine, having such an
   ineffable appearance and semblance of divine holiness, majesty and
   grace, that it evidently denoted him to be a divine person. But if a
   sight of Christ's outward glory might give a rational assurance of his
   divinity, why may not an apprehension of his spiritual glory do so too?
   Doubtless Christ's spiritual glory is in itself as distinguishing, and
   as plainly showing his divinity, as his outward glory, and a great deal
   more: for his spiritual glory is that wherein his divinity consists;
   and the outward glory of his transfiguration showed him to be divine,
   only as it was a remarkable image or representation of that spiritual
   glory. Doubtless, therefore, he that has had a clear sight of the
   spiritual glory of Christ, may say, I have not followed cunningly
   devised fables, but have been an eyewitness of his majesty, upon as
   good grounds as the apostle, when he had respect to the outward glory
   of Christ that he had seen. -- But this brings me to what was proposed
   next, viz., to show that,

   Secondly, This doctrine is rational.

   1. It is rational to suppose, that there is really such an excellency
   in divine things, that is so transcendent and exceedingly different
   from what is in other things, that, if it were seen, would most
   evidently distinguish them. We cannot rationally doubt but that things
   that are divine, that appertain to the Supreme Being, are vastly
   different from things that are human; that there is that godlike, high
   and glorious excellency in them, that does most remarkably difference
   them from the things that are of men; insomuch that if the difference
   were but seen, it would have a convincing, satisfying influence upon
   any one, that they are what they are, viz., divine. What reason can be
   offered against it? Unless we would argue, that God is not remarkably
   distinguished in glory from men.

   If Christ should now appear to any one as he did on the mount at his
   transfiguration; or if he should appear to the world in the glory that
   he now appears in, as he will do at the day of judgment; without doubt,
   the glory and majesty that he would appear in, would be such as would
   satisfy every one that he was a divine person, and that religion was
   true: and it would be a most reasonable, and well grounded conviction
   too. And why may there not be that stamp of divinity, or divine glory
   on the word of God, on the scheme and doctrine of the gospel, that may
   be in like manner distinguishing and as rationally convincing, provided
   it be but seen? It is rational to suppose, that when God speaks to the
   world, there should be something in his word or speech vastly different
   from man's word. Supposing that God never had spoken to the world, but
   we had noticed that he was about to do it; that he was about to reveal
   himself from heaven, and speak to us immediately himself, in divine
   speeches or discourses, as it were from his own mouth, or that he
   should give us a book of his own inditing; after what manner should we
   expect that he would speak? Would it not be rational to suppose, that
   his speech would be exceeding different from man's speech, that he
   should speak like a God; that is, that there should be such an
   excellency and sublimity in his speech or word, such a stamp of wisdom,
   holiness, majesty and other divine perfections, that the word of man,
   yea of the wisest of men, should appear mean and base in comparison of
   it? Doubtless it would be thought rational to expect this, and
   unreasonable to think otherwise. When a wise man speaks in the exercise
   of his wisdom, there is something in every thing he says, that is very
   distinguishable from the talk of a little child. So, without doubt, and
   much more, is the speech of God (if there be any such thing as the
   speech of God) to be distinguished from that of the wisest of men;
   agreeably to Jer. 23:28,29. God having there been reproving the false
   prophets that prophesied in his name, and pretended that what they
   spake was his word, when indeed it was their own word, says, "The
   prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that hath my
   word, let him speak my word faithfully: what is the chaff to the wheat?
   saith the Lord. Is not my word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and like
   a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?"

   2. If there be such a distinguishing excellency in divine things; it is
   rational to suppose that there may be such a thing as seeing it. What
   should hinder but that it may be seen? It is no argument, that there is
   no such thing as such a distinguishing excellency, or that, if there
   be, that it cannot be seen, that some do not see it, though they may be
   discerning men in temporal matters. It is not rational to suppose, if
   there be any such excellency in divine things, that wicked men should
   see it. It is not rational to suppose, that those whose minds are full
   of spiritual pollution, and under the power of filthy lusts, should
   have any relish or sense of divine beauty or excellency; or that their
   minds should be susceptive of that light that is in its own nature so
   pure and heavenly. It need not seem at all strange, that sin should so
   blind the mind, seeing that men's particular natural tempers and
   dispositions will so much blind them in secular matters; as when men's
   natural temper is melancholy, jealous, fearful, proud, or the like.

   3. It is rational to suppose, that this knowledge should be given
   immediately by God, and not be obtained by natural means. Upon what
   account should it seem unreasonable, that there should be any immediate
   communication between God and the creature? It is strange that men
   should make any matter of difficulty of it. Why should not he that made
   all things, still have something immediately to do with the things that
   he has made? Where lies the great difficulty, if we own the being of a
   God, and that he created all things out of nothing, of allowing some
   immediate influence of God on the creation still? And if it be
   reasonable to suppose it with respect to any part of the creation, it
   is especially so with respect to reasonable, intelligent creatures; who
   are next to God in the gradation of the different orders of beings, and
   whose business is most immediately with God; who were made on purpose
   for those exercises that do respect God and wherein they have nextly to
   do with God: for reason teaches, that man was made to serve and glorify
   his Creator. And if it be rational to suppose that God immediately
   communicates himself to man in any affair, it is in this. It is
   rational to suppose that God would reserve that knowledge and wisdom,
   that is of such a divine and excellent nature, to be bestowed
   immediately by himself, and that it should not be left in the power of
   second causes. Spiritual wisdom and grace is that highest and most
   excellent gift that ever God bestows on any creature: in this the
   highest excellency and perfection of a rational creature consists. It
   is also immensely the most important of all divine gifts: it is that
   wherein man's happiness consists, and on which his everlasting welfare
   depends. How rational is it to suppose that God, however he has left
   meaner goods and lower gifts to second causes, and in some sort in
   their power, yet should reserve this most excellent, divine, and
   important of all divine communications, in his own hands, to be
   bestowed immediately by himself, as a thing too great for second causes
   to be concerned in!

   It is rational to suppose, that this blessing should be immediately
   from God; for there is no gift or benefit that is in itself so nearly
   related to the divine nature, there is nothing the creature receives
   that is so much of God, of his nature, so much a participation of the
   deity: it is a kind of emanation of God's beauty, and is related to God
   as the light is to the sun. It is therefore congruous and fit, that
   when it is given of God, it should be nextly from himself, and by
   himself, according to his own sovereign will.

   It is rational to suppose, that it should be beyond a man's power to
   obtain this knowledge and light by the mere strength of natural reason;
   for it is not a thing that belongs to reason, to see the beauty and
   loveliness of spiritual things; it is not a speculative thing, but
   depends on the sense of the heart. Reason indeed is necessary in order
   to it, as it is by reason only that we are become the subjects of the
   means of it; which means I have already shown to be necessary in order
   to it, though they have no proper causal in the affair. It is by reason
   that we become possessed of a notion of those doctrines that are the
   subject matter of this divine light; and reason may many ways be
   indirectly and remotely an advantage to it. And reason has also to do
   in the acts that are immediately consequent on this discovery: a seeing
   the truth of religion from hence, is by reason; though it be but by one
   step, and the inference be immediate. So reason has to do in that
   accepting of, and trusting in Christ, that is consequent on it. But if
   we take reason strictly -- not for the faculty of mental perception in
   general, but for ratiocination, or a power of inferring by arguments --
   the perceiving of spiritual beauty and excellency no more belongs to
   reason, than it belongs to the sense of feeling to perceive colours, or
   to the power of seeing to perceive the sweetness of food. It is out of
   reason's province to perceive the beauty or loveliness of any thing:
   such a perception does not belong to that faculty. Reason's work is to
   perceive truth and not excellency. It is not ratiocination that gives
   men the perception of the beauty and amiableness of a countenance,
   though it may be many ways indirectly an advantage to it; yet it is no
   more reason that immediately perceives it, than it is reason that
   perceives the sweetness of honey: it depends on the sense of the heart.
   -- Reason may determine that a countenance is beautiful to others, it
   may determine that honey is sweet to others; but it will never give me
   a perception of its sweetness.

   I will conclude with a very brief improvement of what has been said.

   First, This doctrine may lead us to reflect on the goodness of God,
   that has so ordered it, that a saving evidence of the truth of the
   gospel is such, as is attainable by persons of mean capacities and
   advantages, as well as those that are of the greatest parts and
   learning. If the evidence of the gospel depended only on history, and
   such reasonings as learned men only are capable of, it would be above
   the reach of far the greatest part of mankind. But persons with but an
   ordinary degree of knowledge, are capable, without a long and subtile
   train of reasoning, to see the divine excellency of the things of
   religion: they are capable of being taught by the Spirit of God, as
   well as learned men. The evidence that is this way obtained, is vastly
   better and more satisfying, than all that can be obtained by the
   arguings of those that are most learned, and greatest masters of
   reason. And babes are as capable of knowing these things, as the wise
   and prudent; and they are often hid from these things, as the wise and
   prudent; and they are often hid from these when they are revealed to
   those. 1 Cor. 1:26,27, "For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not
   many wise men, after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
   called. But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world --."

   Secondly, This doctrine may well put us upon examining ourselves,
   whether we have ever had this divine light, that has been described,
   let into our souls. If there be such a thing indeed, and it be not only
   a notion or whimsy of persons of weak and distempered brains, then
   doubtless it is a thing of great importance, whether we have thus been
   taught by the Spirit of God; whether the light of the glorious gospel
   of Christ, who is the image of God, hath shined unto us, giving us the
   light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ;
   whether we have seen the Son, and believed on him, or have that faith
   of gospel-doctrines which arises from a spiritual sight of Christ.

   Thirdly, All may hence be exhorted earnestly to seek this spiritual
   light. To influence and move to it, the following things may be
   considered.

   1. This is the most excellent and divine wisdom that any creature is
   capable of. It is more excellent than any human learning; it is far
   more excellent than all the knowledge of the greatest philosophers or
   statesmen. Yea, the least glimpse of the glory of God in the face of
   Christ doth more exalt and ennoble the soul, than all the knowledge of
   those that have the greatest speculative understanding in divinity
   without grace. This knowledge has the most noble object that is or can
   be, viz., the divine glory or excellency of God and Christ. The
   knowledge of these objects is that wherein consists the most excellent
   knowledge of the angels, yea, of God himself.

   2. This knowledge is that which is above all others sweet and joyful.
   Men have a great deal of pleasure in human knowledge, in studies of
   natural things; but this is nothing to that joy which arises from this
   divine light shining into the soul. This light gives a view of those
   things that are immensely the most exquisitely beautiful, and capable
   of delighting the eye of the understanding. This spiritual light is the
   dawning of the light of glory in the heart. There is nothing so
   powerful as this to support persons in affliction, and to give the mind
   peace and brightness in this stormy and dark world.

   3. This light is such as effectually influences the inclination, and
   changes the nature of the soul. It assimilates the nature to the divine
   nature, and changes the soul into an image of the same glory that is
   beheld. 2 Cor. 3:18, "But we all with open face, beholding as in a
   glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from
   glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord." This knowledge will
   wean from the world, and raise the inclination to heavenly things. It
   will turn the heart to God as the fountain of good, and to choose him
   for the only portion. This light, and this only, will bring the soul to
   a saving close with Christ. It conforms the heart to the gospel,
   mortifies its enmity and opposition against the scheme of salvation
   therein revealed: it causes the heart to embrace the joyful tidings,
   and entirely to adhere to, and acquiesce in the revelation of Christ as
   our Saviour: it causes the whole soul to accord and symphonize with it,
   admitting it with entire credit and respect cleaving to it with full
   inclination and affection; and it effectually disposes the soul to give
   up itself entirely to Christ.

   4. This light, and this only, has its fruit in a universal holiness of
   life. No merely notional or speculative understanding of the doctrines
   of religion will ever bring to this. But this light, as it reaches the
   bottom of the heart, and changes the nature, so it will effectually
   dispose to a universal obedience. It shows God's worthiness to be
   obeyed and served. It draws forth the heart in a sincere love to God,
   which is the only principle of a true, gracious, and universal
   obedience; and it convinces of the reality of those glorious rewards
   that God has promised to them that obey him.
     __________________________________________________________________

Christ's Agony

A Sermon

  by

Jonathan Edwards

  Luke 22:44 -- And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat
  was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.

   Our Lord Jesus Christ, in his original nature, was infinitely above all
   suffering, for he was "God over all, blessed for evermore;" but, when
   he became man, he was not only capable of suffering, but partook of
   that nature that is remarkably feeble and exposed to suffering. The
   human nature, on account of its weakness, is in Scripture compared to
   the grass of the field, which easily withers and decays. So it is
   compared to a leaf; and to the dry stubble; and to a blast of wind: and
   the nature of feeble man is said to be but dust and ashes, to have its
   foundation in the dust, and to be crushed before the moth. It was this
   nature, with all its weakness and exposedness to sufferings, which
   Christ, who is the Lord God omnipotent, took upon him. He did not take
   the human nature on him in its first, most perfect and vigorous state,
   but in that feeble forlorn state which it is in since the fall; and
   therefore Christ is called "a tender plant," and "a root out of a dry
   ground." Isa. 53:2. "For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant,
   and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and
   when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him."
   Thus, as Christ's principal errand into the world was suffering, so,
   agreeably to that errand, he came with such a nature and in such
   circumstances, as most made way for his suffering; so his whole life
   was filled up with suffering, he began to suffer in his infancy, but
   his suffering increased the more he drew near to the close of his life.
   His suffering after his public ministry began, was probably much
   greater than before; and the latter part of the time of his public
   ministry seems to have been distinguished by suffering. The longer
   Christ lived in the world, the more men saw and heard of him, the more
   they hated him. His enemies were more and more enraged by the
   continuance of the opposition that he made to their lusts; and the
   devil having been often baffled by him, grew more and more enraged, and
   strengthened the battle more and more against him: so that the cloud
   over Christ's head grew darker and darker, as long as he lived in the
   world, till it was in its greatest blackness when he hung upon the
   cross and cried out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me! Before
   this, it was exceedingly dark, in the time of his agony in the garden;
   of which we have an account in the words now read; and which I propose
   to make the subject of my present discourse. The word agony properly
   signifies an earnest strife, such as is witnessed in wrestling,
   running, or fighting. And therefore in Luke 13:24. "Strive to enter in
   at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in,
   and shall not be able;" the word in the original, translated strive, is
   agwnizesqe. "Agonize, to enter in at the strait gate." The word is
   especially used for that sort of strife, which in those days was
   exhibited in the Olympic games, in which men strove for the mastery in
   running, wrestling, and other such kinds of exercises; and a prize was
   set up that was bestowed on the conqueror. Those, who thus contended,
   were, in the language then in use, said to agonize. Thus the apostle in
   his epistle to the Christians of Corinth, a city of Greece, where such
   games were annually exhibited, says in allusion to the strivings of the
   combatants, "And every man that striveth for the mastery," in the
   original, every one that agonizeth, "is temperate in all things." The
   place where those games were held was called Agwn, or the place of
   agony; and the word is particularly used in Scripture for that striving
   in earnest prayer wherein persons wrestle with God:they are said to
   agonize, or to be in agony, in prayer. So the word is used Rom. 15:30.
   "Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for
   the love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in your prayers
   to God for me:" in the original sunagwnizesqai moi, that ye agonize
   together with me. So Col. 4:12. "Always labouring fervently for you in
   prayer, that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God:"
   in the original agwnizwn agonizing for you. So that when it is said in
   the text that Christ was in an agony, the meaning is, that his soul was
   in a great and earnest strife and conflict. It was so in two respects:

   1. As his soul was in a great and sore conflict with those terrible and
   amazing views and apprehensions which he then had.

   2. As he was at the same time in great labour and earnest strife with
   God in prayer.

   I propose therefore, in discoursing on the subject of Christ's agony,
   distinctly to unfold it, under these two propositions,

   I. That the soul of Christ in his agony in the garden had a sore
   conflict with those terrible and amazing views and apprehensions, of
   which he was then the subject.

   II. That the soul of Christ in his agony in the garden had a great and
   earnest labour and struggle with God in prayer.

   I. The soul of Christ in his agony in the garden had a sore conflict
   with those terrible amazing views and apprehensions, of which he was
   then the subject.

   In illustrating this proposition I shall endeavour to show,

   1. What those views and apprehensions were.

   2. That the conflict or agony of Christ's soul was occasioned by those
   views and apprehensions.

   3. That this conflict was peculiarly great and distressing; and,

   4. What we may suppose to be the special design of God in giving Christ
   those terrible views and apprehensions, and causing him to suffer that
   dreadful conflict, before he was crucified.

   I proposed to show,

   First, What were those terrible views and amazing apprehensions which
   Christ had in his agony. This may be explained by considering,

   1. The cause of those views and apprehensions; and,

   2. The manner in which they were then experienced.

   1. The cause of those views and apprehensions, which Christ had in his
   agony in the garden, was the bitter cup which he was soon after to
   drink on the cross. The sufferings which Christ underwent in his agony
   in the garden, were not his greatest sufferings; though they were so
   very great. But his last sufferings upon the cross were his principal
   sufferings; and therefore they are called "the cup that he had to
   drink." The sufferings of the cross, under which he was slain, are
   always in the Scriptures represented as the main sufferings of Christ;
   those in which especially "he bare our sins in his own body," and made
   atonement for sin. His enduring the cross, his humbling himself, and
   becoming obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, is spoken of
   as the main thing wherein his sufferings appeared. This is the cup that
   Christ had set before him in his agony. It is manifest that Christ had
   this in view at this time, from the prayers which he then offered.
   According to Matthew, Christ made three prayers that evening while in
   the garden of Gethsemane, and all on this one subject, the bitter cup
   that he was to drink. Of the first, we have an account in Matt. 26:39.
   "And he went a little farther, and fell on his face and prayed, saying,
   O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me;
   nevertheless, not as I will but as thou wilt:" of the second in the 42d
   verse, "He went away again the second time and prayed, saying, O my
   Father, if this cup may not pass from me, except I drink it, thy will
   be done:" and of the third in the 44th verse, "And he left them, and
   went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the same words."
   From this it plainly appears what it was of which Christ had such
   terrible views and apprehensions at that time. What he thus insists on
   in his prayers, shows on what his mind was so deeply intent. It was his
   sufferings on the cross, which were to be endured the next day, when
   there should be darkness over all the earth, and at the same time a
   deeper darkness over the soul of Christ, of which he had now such
   lively views and distressing apprehensions.

   2. The manner in which this bitter cup was now set in Christ's view.

   (1.) He had a lively apprehension of it impressed at that time on his
   mind. He had an apprehension of the cup that he was to drink before.
   His principal errand into the the world was to drink that cup, and he
   therefore was never unthoughtful of it, but always bore it in his mind,
   and often spoke of it to his disciples. Thus Matt. 16:21. "From that
   time forth began Jesus to show unto his disciples how that he must go
   unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders, and chief
   priests, and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day
   ." Again ch. 20:17, 18, 19. "And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the
   twelve disciples apart in the way, and said unto them, Behold, we go up
   to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief
   priests, and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death. And
   shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to
   crucify him: and the third day he shall rise again." The same thing was
   the subject of conversation on the mount with Moses and Elias when he
   was transfigured. So he speaks of his bloody baptism, Luke 12:50. "But
   I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I straitened till it
   be accomplished!" He speaks of it again to Zebedee's children, Matt.
   20:22. "Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to
   be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? They say unto
   him, We are able." He spake of his being lifted up. John 8:28. 'Then
   said Jesus unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall
   ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself; but as my Father
   hath taught me, I speak these things ." John 12:34. "The people
   answered him, We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth for
   ever: and how sayest thou, The Son of man must be lifted up? Who is
   this Son of man?" So he spake of destroying the temple of his body,
   John 2:19. "Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and
   in three days I will raise it up ." And he was very much in speaking of
   it a little before his agony, in his dying counsels to his disciples in
   the 12th and 13th ch. of John. Thus this was not the first time that
   Christ had this bitter cup in his view. On the contrary, he seems
   always to have had it in view. But it seems that at this time God gave
   him an extraordinary view of it. A sense of that wrath that was to be
   poured out upon him, and of those amazing sufferings that he was to
   undergo, was strongly impressed on his mind by the immediate power of
   God; so that he had far more full and lively apprehensions of the
   bitterness of the cup which he was to drink than he ever had before,
   and these apprehensions were so terrible, that his feeble human nature
   shrunk at the sight, and was ready to sink.

   2. The cup of bitterness was now represented as just at hand. He had
   not only a more clear and lively view of it than before; but it was now
   set directly before him, that he might without delay take it up and
   drink it; for then, within that same hour, Judas was to come with his
   band of men, and he was then to deliver up himself into their hands to
   the end that he might drink this cup the next day; unless indeed he
   refused to take it, and so made his escape from that place where Judas
   would come; which he had opportunity enough to do if he had been so
   minded. Having thus shown what those terrible views and apprehensions
   were which Christ had in the time of his agony; I shall endeavour to
   show,

   II. That the conflict which the soul of Christ then endured was
   occasioned by those views and apprehensions. The sorrow and distress
   which his soul then suffered, arose from that lively, and full, and
   immediate view which he had then given him of that cup of wrath; by
   which God the Father did as it were set the cup down before him, for
   him to take it and drink it. Some have inquired, what was the occasion
   of that distress and agony, and many speculations there have been about
   it, but the account which the Scripture itself gives us is sufficiently
   full in this matter, and does not leave room for speculation or doubt.
   The thing that Christ's mind was so full of at that time was, without
   doubt, the same with that which his mouth was so full of: it was the
   dread which his feeble human nature had of that dreadful cup, which was
   vastly more terrible than Nebuchadnezzar's fiery furnace. He had then a
   near view of that furnace of wrath, into which he was to be cast; he
   was brought to the mouth of the furnace that he might look into it, and
   stand and view its raging flames, and see the glowings of its heat,
   that he might know where he was going and what he was about to suffer.
   This was the thing that filled his soul with sorrow and darkness, this
   terrible sight as it were overwhelmed him. For what was that human
   nature of Christ to such mighty wrath as this? it was in itself,
   without the supports of God, but a feeble worm of the dust, a thing
   that was crushed before the moth, none of God's children ever had such
   a cup set before them, as this first being of every creature had. But
   not to dwell any longer on this, I hasten to show,

   III. That the conflict in Christ's soul, in this view of his last
   sufferings, was dreadful, beyond all expression or conception. This
   will appear,

   1. From what is said of its dreadfulness in the history. By one
   evangelist we are told, (Matt. 26:37.) "He began to be sorrowful and
   very heavy; and by another, (Mark 14:33.) "And he taketh with him
   Peter, and James, and John, and began to be sore amazed, and to be very
   heavy." These expressions hold forth the intense and overwhelming
   distress that his soul was in. Luke's expression in the text of his
   being in an agony, according to the signification of that word in the
   original, implies no common degree of sorrow, but such extreme distress
   that his nature had a most violent conflict with it, as a man that
   wrestles with all his might with a strong man, who labours and exerts
   his utmost strength to gain a conquest over him.

   2. From what Christ himself says of it, who was not wont to magnify
   things beyond the truth. He says, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful even
   unto death." Matt. 26:38. What language can more strongly express the
   most extreme degree of sorrow? His soul was not only "sorrowful," but
   "exceeding sorrowful;" and not only so, but because that did not fully
   express the degree of his sorrow, he adds, "even unto death;" which
   seems to intimate that the very pains and sorrows of hell, of eternal
   death, had got hold upon him. The Hebrews were wont to express the
   utmost degree of sorrow that any creature could be liable to by the
   phrase, the shadow of death. Christ had now, as it were, the shadow of
   death brought over his soul by the near view which he had of that
   bitter cup that was now set before him.

   3. From the effect which it had on his body, in causing that bloody
   sweat that we read of in the text. In our translation it is said, that
   "his sweat was, as it were, great drops of blood, falling down to the
   ground." The word rendered great drops, is in the original qromboi,
   which properly signifies lumps or clots; for we may suppose that the
   blood that was pressed out through the pores of his skin by the
   violence of that inward struggle and conflict that there was, when it
   came to be exposed to the cool air of the night, congealed and
   stiffened, as is the nature of blood, and so fell off from him not in
   drops, but in clots. If the suffering of Christ had occasioned merely a
   violent sweat, it would have shown that he was in great agony; for it
   must be an extraordinary grief and exercise of mind that causes the
   body to be all of a sweat abroad in the open air, in a cold night as
   that was, as is evident from John 18:18. "And the servants and officers
   stood there, who had made a fire of coals, (for it was cold,) and they
   warmed themselves; and Peter stood with them, and warmed himself." This
   was the same night in which Christ had his agony in the garden. But
   Christ's inward distress and grief was not merely such as caused him to
   be in a violent and universal sweat, but such as caused him to sweat
   blood. The distress and anguish of his mind was so unspeakably extreme
   as to force his blood through the pores of his skin, and that so
   plentifully as to fall in great clots or drops from his body to the
   ground. I come now to show,

   IV. What may be supposed to be the special end of God's giving Christ
   beforehand these terrible views of his last sufferings; in other words,
   why it was needful that he should have a more full and extraordinary
   view of the cup that he was to drink, a little before he drank it, than
   ever he had before; or why he must have such a foretaste of the wrath
   of God to be endured on the cross, before the time came that he was
   actually to endure it.

   Answer. It was needful, in order that he might take the cup and drink
   it, as knowing what he did. Unless the human nature of Christ had had
   an extraordinary view given him beforehand of what he was to suffer, he
   could not, as man, fully know beforehand what he was going to suffer,
   and therefore could not, as man, know what he did when he took the cup
   to drink it, because he would not fully have known what the cup was--it
   being a cup that he never drank before. If Christ had plunged himself
   into those dreadful sufferings, without being fully sensible beforehand
   of their bitterness and dreadfulness, he must have done he knew not
   what. As man, he would have plunged himself into sufferings of the
   amount of which he was ignorant, and so have acted blindfold; and of
   course his taking upon him these sufferings could not have been so
   fully his own act. Christ, as God, perfectly knew what these sufferings
   were; but it was more needful also that he should know as man; for he
   was to suffer as man, and the act of Christ in taking that cup was the
   act of Christ as God man. But the man Christ Jesus hitherto never had
   had experience of any such sufferings as he was now to endure on the
   cross; and therefore he could not fully know what they were beforehand,
   but by having an extraordinary view of them set before him, and an
   extraordinary sense of them impressed on his mind. We have heard of
   tortures that others have undergone, but we do not fully know what they
   were, because we never experienced them; and it is impossible that we
   should fully know what they were but in one of these two ways, either
   by experiencing them, or by having a view given of them, or a sense of
   them impressed in an extraordinary way. Such a sense was impressed on
   the mind of the man Christ Jesus, in the garden of Gethsemane, of his
   last sufferings, and that caused his agony. When he had a full sight
   given him what that wrath of God was that he was to suffer, the sight
   was overwhelming to him; it made his soul exceeding sorrowful, even
   unto death. Christ was going to be cast into a dreadful furnace of
   wrath, and it was not proper that he should plunge himself into it
   blindfold, as not knowing how dreadful the furnace was. Therefore that
   he might not do so, God first brought him and set him at the mouth of
   the furnace, that he might look in, and stand and view its fierce and
   raging flames, and might see where he was going, and might voluntarily
   enter into it and bear it for sinners, as knowing what it was. This
   view Christ had in his agony. Then God brought the cup that he was to
   drink, and set it down before him, that he might have a full view of
   it, and see what it was before he took it and drank it. If Christ had
   not fully known what the dreadfulness of these sufferings was, before
   he took them upon him, his taking them upon him could not have been
   fully his own act as man; there could have been no explicit act of his
   will about that which he was ignorant of; there could have been no
   proper trial, whether he would be willing to undergo such dreadful
   sufferings or not, unless he had known beforehand how dreadful they
   were; but when he had seen what they were, by having an extraordinary
   view given him of them, and then undertaken to endure them afterwards;
   then he acted as knowing what he did; then his taking that cup, and
   bearing such dreadful sufferings, was properly his own act by an
   explicit choice; and so his love to sinners, in that choice of his, was
   the more wonderful, as also his obedience to God in it. And it was
   necessary that this extraordinary view that Christ had of the cup he
   was to drink should be given at that time, just before he was
   apprehended. This was the most proper season for it, just before he
   took the cup, and while he yet had opportunity to refuse the cup; for
   before he was apprehended by the company led by Judas, he had
   opportunity to make his escape at pleasure. For the place where he was,
   was without the city, where he was not at all confined, and was a
   lonesome, solitary place; and it was the night season; so that he might
   have gone from that place where he would, and his enemies not have
   known where to have found him. This view that he had of the bitter cup
   was given him while he was yet fully at liberty, before he was given
   into the hands of his enemies. Christ's delivering himself up into the
   hands of his enemies, as he did when Judas came, which was just after
   his agony, was properly his act of taking the cup in order to drink;
   for Christ knew that the issue of that would be his crucifixion the
   next day. These things may show us the end of Christ's agony, and the
   necessity there was of such an agony before his last sufferings.

APPLICATION.

   1. Hence we may learn how dreadful Christ's last sufferings were. We
   learn it from the dreadful effect which the bare foresight of them had
   upon him in his agony. His last sufferings were so dreadful, that the
   view which Christ had of them before overwhelmed him and amazed him, as
   it is said he began to be sore amazed. The very sight of these last
   sufferings was so very dreadful as to sink his soul down into the dark
   shadow of death; yea, so dreadful was it, that in the sore conflict
   which his nature had with it, he was all in a sweat of blood, his body
   all over was covered with clotted blood, and not only his body, but the
   very ground under him with the blood that fell from him, which had been
   forced through his pores through the violence of his agony. And if only
   the foresight of the cup was so dreadful, how dreadful was the cup
   itself, how far beyond all that can be uttered or conceived! Many of
   the martyrs have endured extreme tortures, but from what has been said,
   there is all reason to think those all were a mere nothing to the last
   sufferings of Christ on the cross. And what has been said affords a
   convincing argument that the sufferings which Christ endured in his
   body on the cross, though they were very dreadful, were yet the least
   part of his last sufferings; and that beside those, he endured
   sufferings in his soul which were vastly greater. For if it had been
   only the sufferings which he endured in his body, though they were very
   dreadful, we cannot conceive that the mere anticipation of them would
   have such an effect on Christ. Many of the martyrs, for aught we know,
   have endured as severe tortures in their bodies as Christ did. Many of
   the martyrs have been crucified, as Christ was; and yet their souls
   have not been so overwhelmed. There has been no appearance of such
   amazing sorrow and distress of mind either at the anticipation of their
   sufferings, or in the actual enduring of them.

   2. From what has been said, we may see the wonderful strength of the
   love of Christ to sinners. What has been said shows the strength of
   Christ's love two ways.

   1. That it was so strong as to carry him through that agony that he was
   then in. The suffering that he then was actually subject to, was
   dreadful and amazing, as has been shown; and how wonderful was his love
   that lasted and was upheld still! The love of any mere man or angel
   would doubtless have sunk under such a weight, and never would have
   endured such a conflict in such a bloody sweat as that of Jesus Christ.
   The anguish of Christ's soul at that time was so strong as to cause
   that wonderful effect on his body. But his love to his enemies, poor
   and unworthy as they were, was stronger still. The heart of Christ at
   that time was full of distress, but it was fuller of love to vile
   worms: his sorrows abounded, but his love did much more abound.
   Christ's soul was overwhelmed with a deluge of grief, but this was from
   a deluge of love to sinners in his heart sufficient to overflow the
   world, and overwhelm the highest mountains of its sins. Those great
   drops of blood that fell down to the ground were a manifestation of an
   ocean of love in Christ's heart.

   2. The strength of Christ's love more especially appears in this, that
   when he had such a full view of the dreadfulness of the cup that he was
   to drink, that so amazed him, he would notwithstanding even then take
   it up, and drink it. Then seems to have been the greatest and most
   peculiar trial of the strength of the love of Christ, when God set down
   the bitter portion before him, and let him see what he had to drink, if
   he persisted in his love to sinners; and brought him to the mouth of
   the furnace that he might see its fierceness, and have a full view of
   it, and have time then to consider whether he would go in and suffer
   the flames of this furnace for such unworthy creatures, or not. This
   was as it were proposing it to Christ's last consideration what he
   would do; as much as if it had then been said to him, 'Here is the cup
   that you are to drink, unless you will give up your undertaking for
   sinners, and even leave them to perish as they deserve. Will you take
   this cup, and drink it for them, or not? There is the furnace into
   which you are to be cast, if they are to be saved; either they must
   perish, or you must endure this for them. There you see how terrible
   the heat of the furnace is; you see what pain and anguish you must
   endure on the morrow, unless you give up the cause of sinners. What
   will you do? is your love such that you will go on? Will you cast
   yourself into this dreadful furnace of wrath?' Christ's soul was
   overwhelmed with the thought; his feeble human nature shrunk at the
   dismal sight. It put him into this dreadful agony which you have heard
   described; but his love to sinners held out. Christ would not undergo
   these sufferings needlessly, if sinners could be saved without. If
   there was not an absolute necessity of his suffering them in order to
   their salvation, he desired that the cup might pass from him. But if
   sinners, on whom he had set his love, could not, agreeably to the will
   of God, be saved without his drinking it, he chose that the will of God
   should be done. He chose to go on and endure the suffering, awful as it
   appeared to him. And this was his final conclusion, after the dismal
   conflict of his poor feeble human nature, after he had had the cup in
   view, and for at least the space of one hour, had seen how amazing it
   was. Still he finally resolved that he would bear it, rather than those
   poor sinners whom he had loved from all eternity should perish. When
   the dreadful cup was before him, he did not say within himself, why
   should I, who am so great and glorious a person, infinitely more
   honourable than all the angels of heaven, Why should I go to plunge
   myself into such dreadful, amazing torments for worthless wretched
   worms that cannot be profitable to God, or me, and that deserve to be
   hated by me, and not to be loved? Why should I, who have been living
   from all eternity in the enjoyment of the Father's love, go to cast
   myself into such a furnace for them that never can requite me for it?
   Why should I yield myself to be thus crushed by the weight of divine
   wrath, for them who have no love to me, and are my enemies? they do not
   deserve any union with me, and never did, and never will do, any thing
   to recommend themselves to me. What shall I be the richer for having
   saved a number of miserable haters of God and me, who deserve to have
   divine justice glorified in their destruction? Such, however, was not
   the language of Christ's heart, in these circumstances; but on the
   contrary, his love held out, and he resolved even then, in the midst of
   his agony, to yield himself up to the will of God, and to take the cup
   and drink it. He would not flee to get out of the way of Judas and
   those that were with him, though he knew they were coming, but that
   same hour delivered himself voluntarily into their hands. When they
   came with swords and staves to apprehend him, and he could have called
   upon his Father, who would immediately have sent many legions of angels
   to repel his enemies, and have delivered him, he would not do it; and
   when his disciples would have made resistance, he would not suffer
   them, as you may see in Matt. 26:51, and onward: "And, behold, one of
   them which were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword,
   and struck a servant of the high priest's, and smote off his ear. Then
   said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into its place: for all
   they that take the sword shall perish with the sword. Thinkest thou
   that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he will presently give me more
   than twelve legions of angels? But how then shall the scriptures be
   fulfilled, that thus it must be? In that same hour said Jesus to the
   multitudes, Are ye come out as against a thief, with swords and staves
   for to take me? I sat daily with you teaching in the temple, and ye
   laid no hold on me. But all this was done that the scriptures of the
   prophets might be fulfilled." And Christ, instead of hiding himself
   from Judas and the soldiers, told them, when they seemed to be at a
   loss whether he was the person whom they sought; and when they seemed
   still somewhat to hesitate, being seized with some terror in their
   minds, he told them so again, and so yielded himself up into their
   hands, to be bound by them, after he had shown them that he could
   easily resist them if he pleased, when a single word spoken by him,
   threw them backwards to the ground, as you may see in John 18:3, etc.
   "Judas then, having received a band of men and officers from the chief
   priests and Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns, and torches, and
   weapons. Jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him,
   went forth, and said unto them, Whom seek ye? They answered him, Jesus
   of Nazareth. Jesus said unto them, I am he. As soon then as he had said
   unto them, I am he, they went backward and fell to the ground." Thus
   powerful, constant, and violent was the love of Christ; and the special
   trial of his love above all others in his whole life seems to have been
   in the time of his agony. For though his sufferings were greater
   afterwards, when he was on the cross, yet he saw clearly what those
   sufferings were to be, in the time of his agony; and that seems to have
   been the first time that ever Christ Jesus had a clear view what these
   sufferings were; and after this the trial was not so great, because the
   conflict was over. His human nature had been in a struggle with his
   love to sinners, but his love had got the victory. The thing, upon a
   full view of his sufferings, had been resolved on and concluded; and
   accordingly, when the moment arrived, he actually went through with
   those sufferings.

   But there are two circumstances of Christ's agony that do still make
   the strength and constancy of his love to sinners the more conspicuous.

   1. That at the same time that he had such a view of the dreadfulness of
   his sufferings, he had also an extraordinary view of the hatefulness of
   the wickedness of those for whom those sufferings were to make
   atonement. There are two things that render Christ's love wonderful: 1.
   That he should be willing to endure sufferings that were so great; and
   2. That he should be willing to endure them to make atonement for
   wickedness that was so great. But in order to its being properly said,
   Christ of his own act and choice endured sufferings that were so great,
   to make atonement for wickedness that was so great, two things were
   necessary. 1. That he should have an extraordinary sense how great
   these sufferings were to be, before he endured them. This was given in
   his agony. And 2. That he should also at the same time have an
   extraordinary sense how great and hateful was the wickedness of men for
   which he suffered to make atonement; or how unworthy those were for
   whom he died. And both these were given at the same time. When Christ
   had such an extraordinary sense how bitter his cup was to be, he had
   much to make him sensible how unworthy and hateful that wickedness of
   mankind was for which he suffered; because the hateful and malignant
   nature of that corruption never appeared more fully than in the spite
   and cruelty of men in these sufferings; and yet his love was such that
   he went on notwithstanding to suffer for them who were full of such
   hateful corruption.

   It was the corruption and wickedness of men that contrived and effected
   his death; it was the wickedness of men that agreed with Judas, it was
   the wickedness of men that betrayed him, and that apprehended him, and
   bound him, and led him away like a malefactor; it was by men's
   corruption and wickedness that he was arraigned, and falsely accused,
   and unjustly judged. It was by men's wickedness that he was reproached,
   mocked, buffeted, and spit upon. It was by men's wickedness that
   Barabbas was preferred before him. It was men's wickedness that laid
   the cross upon him to bear, and that nailed him to it, and put him to
   so cruel and ignominious a death. This tended to give Christ an
   extraordinary sense of the greatness and hatefulness of the depravity
   of mankind.

   1. Because hereby in the time of his sufferings he had that depravity
   set before him as it is, without disguise. When it killed Christ, it
   appeared in its proper colours. Here Christ saw it in its true nature,
   which is the utmost hatred and contempt of God; in its ultimate
   tendency and desire, which is to kill God; and in its greatest
   aggravation and highest act, which is killing a person that was God.

   2. Because in these sufferings he felt the fruits of that wickedness.
   It was then directly levelled against himself, and exerted itself
   against him to work his reproach and torment, which tended to impress a
   stronger sense of its hatefulness on the human nature of Christ. But
   yet at the same time, so wonderful was the love of Christ to those who
   exhibited this hateful corruption, that he endured those very
   sufferings to deliver them from the punishment of that very corruption.
   The wonderfulness of Christ's dying love appears partly in that he died
   for those that were so unworthy in themselves, as all mankind have the
   same kind of corruptions in their hearts, and partly in that he died
   for those who were not only so wicked, but whose wickedness consists in
   being enemies to him; so that he did not only die for the wicked, but
   for his own enemies; and partly in that he was willing to die for his
   enemies at the same time that he was feeling the fruits of their
   enmity, while he felt the utmost effects and exertions of their spite
   against him in the greatest possible contempt and cruelty towards him
   in his own greatest ignominy, torments, and death; and partly in that
   he was willing to atone for their being his enemies in these very
   sufferings, and by that very ignominy, torment, and death that was the
   fruit of it. The sin and wickedness of men, for which Christ suffered
   to make atonement, was, as it were, set before Christ in his view.

   1. In that this wickedness was but a sample of the wickedness of
   mankind; for the corruption of all mankind is of the same nature, and
   the wickedness that is in one man's heart is of the same nature and
   tendency as in another's. As in water, face answereth to face, so the
   heart of man to man.

   2. It is probable that Christ died to make atonement for that
   individual actual wickedness that wrought his sufferings, that
   reproached, mocked, buffeted, and crucified him. Some of his
   crucifiers, for whom he prayed that they might be forgiven, while they
   were in the very act of crucifying him, were afterwards, in answer to
   his prayer, converted, by the preaching of Peter; as we have an account
   of in the 2nd chapter of Acts.

   2. Another circumstance of Christ's agony that shows the strength of
   his love, is the ungrateful carriage of his disciples at that time.
   Christ's disciples were among those for whom he endured this agony, and
   among those for whom he was going to endure those last sufferings, of
   which he now had such dreadful apprehensions. Yet Christ had already
   given them an interest in the benefits of those sufferings. Their sins
   had already been forgiven them through that blood that he was going to
   shed, and they had been infinite gainers already by that dying pity and
   love which he had to them, and had through his sufferings been
   distinguished from all the world besides. Christ had put greater honour
   upon them than any other, by making them his disciples in a more
   honourable sense than he had done any other. And yet now, when he had
   that dreadful cup set before him which he was going to drink for them,
   and was in such an agony at the sight of it, he saw no return on their
   part but indifference and ingratitude. When he only desired them to
   watch with him, that he might be comforted in their company, now at
   this sorrowful moment they fell asleep; and showed that they had not
   concern enough about it to induce them to keep awake with him even for
   one hour, though he desired it of them once and again. But yet this
   ungrateful treatment of theirs, for whom he was to drink the cup of
   wrath which God had set before him, did not discourage him from taking
   it, and drinking it for them. His love held out to them; having loved
   his own, he loved them to the end. He did not say within himself when
   this cup of trembling was before him, Why should I endure so much for
   those that are so ungrateful; why should I here wrestle with the
   expectation of the terrible wrath of God to be borne by me to-morrow,
   for them that in the mean time have not so much concern for me as to
   keep awake with me when I desire it of them even for one hour? But on
   the contrary, with tender and fatherly compassions he excuses this
   ingratitude of his disciples, and says, Matt. 26:41. "Watch and pray,
   that ye enter not into temptation; the spirit indeed is willing, but
   the flesh is weak;" and went and was apprehended, and mocked, and
   scourged, and crucified, and poured out his soul unto death, under the
   heavy weight of God's dreadful wrath on the cross for them.

   3rd Inference. From what has been said, we may learn the wonderfulness
   of Christ's submission to the will of God. Christ, as he was a divine
   person, was the absolute sovereign of heaven and earth, but yet he was
   the most wonderful instance of submission to God's sovereignty that
   ever was. When he had such a view of the terribleness of his last
   sufferings, and prayed if it were possible that that cup might pass
   from him, i.e. if there was not an absolute necessity of it in order to
   the salvation of sinners, yet it was with a perfect submission to the
   will of God. He adds, "Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done."
   He chose rather that the inclination of his human nature, which so much
   dreaded such exquisite torments, should be crossed, than that God's
   will should not take place. He delighted in the thought of God's will
   being done; and when he went and prayed the second time, he had nothing
   else to say but, "O my Father, if this cup may not pass from me except
   I drink it, thy will be done;" and so the third time. What are such
   trials of submission as any of us sometimes have in the afflictions
   that we suffer in comparison of this? If God does but in his providence
   signify it to be his will that we should part with a child, how hardly
   are we brought to yield to it, how ready to be unsubmissive and
   froward! Or if God lays his hand upon us in some acute pain of body,
   how ready are we to be discontented and impatient; when the innocent
   Son of God, who deserved no suffering could quietly submit to
   sufferings inconceivably great, and say it over and over, God's will be
   done! When he was brought and set before that dreadful furnace of wrath
   into which he was to be cast, in order that he might look into it and
   have a full view of its fierceness, when his flesh shrunk at it, and
   his nature was in such a conflict, that his body was all covered with a
   sweat of blood falling in great drops to the ground, yet his soul
   quietly yielded that the will of God should be done, rather than the
   will or inclination of his human nature.

   4th Infer. What has been said on this subject also shows us the glory
   of Christ's obedience. Christ was subject to the moral law as Adam was,
   and he was also subject to the ceremonial and judicial laws of Moses;
   but the principal command that he had received of the Father was, that
   he should lay down his life, that he should voluntarily yield up
   himself to those terrible sufferings on the cross. To do this was his
   principal errand into the world; and doubtless the principal command
   that he received, was about that which was the principal errand on
   which he was sent. The Father, when he sent him into the world, sent
   him with commands concerning what he should do in the world; and his
   chief command of all was about that, which was the errand he was
   chiefly sent upon, which was to lay down his life. And therefore this
   command was the principal trial of his obedience. It was the greatest
   trial of his obedience, because it was by far the most difficult
   command: all the rest were easy in comparison of this. And the main
   trial that Christ had, whether he would obey this command, was in the
   time of his agony; for that was within an hour before he was
   apprehended in order to his sufferings, when he must either yield
   himself up to them, or fly from them. And then it was the first time
   that Christ had a full view of the difficulty of this command; which
   appeared so great as to cause that bloody sweat. Then was the conflict
   of weak human nature with the difficulty, then was the sore struggles
   and wrestling with the heavy trial he had, and then Christ got the
   victory over the temptation, from the dread of his human nature. His
   obedience held out through the conflict. Then we may suppose that Satan
   was especially let loose to set in with the natural dread that the
   human nature had of such torments, and to strive to his utmost to
   dissuade Christ from going on to drink the bitter cup; for about that
   time, towards the close of Christ's life, was he especially delivered
   up into the hands of Satan to be tempted of him, more than he was
   immediately after his baptism; for Christ says, speaking of that time,
   Luke 22:53. "When I was daily with you in the temple, ye stretched
   forth no hands against me; but this is your hour, and the power of
   darkness." So that Christ, in the time of his agony, was wrestling not
   only with overwhelming views of his last sufferings, but he also
   wrestled, in that bloody sweat, with principalities and powers -- he
   contended at that time with the great leviathan that laboured to his
   utmost to tempt him to disobedience. So that then Christ had
   temptations every way to draw him off from obedience to God. He had
   temptations from his feeble human nature, that exceedingly dreaded such
   torments; and he had temptations from men, who were his enemies; and he
   had temptations from the ungrateful carriage of his own disciples; and
   he had temptations from the devil. He had also an overwhelming trial
   from the manifestation of God's own wrath; when, in the words of
   Isaiah, it pleased the Lord to bruise him and put him to grief. But yet
   he failed not, but got the victory over all, and performed that great
   act of obedience at that time to that same God that hid himself from
   him, and was showing his wrath to him for men's sins, which he must
   presently suffer. Nothing could move him away from his steadfast
   obedience to God, but he persisted in saying, "Thy will be done:"
   expressing not only his submission, but his obedience; not only his
   compliance with the disposing will of God, but also with his preceptive
   will. God had given him this cup to drink, and had commanded him to
   drink it, and that was reason enough with him to drink it; hence he
   says, at the conclusion of his agony, when Judas came with his band,
   "The cup which my Father giveth me to drink, shall I not drink it?"
   John 18:11. Christ, at the time of his agony, had an inconceivably
   greater trial of obedience than any man or any angel ever had. How much
   was this trial of the obedience of the second Adam beyond the trial of
   the obedience of the first Adam! How light was our first father's
   temptation in comparison of this! And yet our first surety failed, and
   our second failed not, but obtained a glorious victory, and went and
   became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Thus wonderful
   and glorious was the obedience of Christ, by which he wrought out
   righteousness for believers, and which obedience is imputed to them. No
   wonder that it is a sweet penalty sown, and that God stands ready to
   bestow heaven as its reward on all that believe on him.

   5. What has been said shows us the sottishness of secure sinners in
   being so fearless of the wrath of God. If the wrath of God was so
   dreadful, that, when Christ only expected it, his human nature was
   nearly overwhelmed with the fear of it, and his soul was amazed, and
   his body all over in a bloody sweat; then how sottish are sinners, who
   are under the threatening of the same wrath of God, and are condemned
   to it, and are every moment exposed to it; and yet, instead of
   manifesting intense apprehension, are quiet and easy, and unconcerned;
   instead of being sorrowful and very heavy, go about with a light and
   careless heart; instead of crying out in bitter agony, are often gay
   and cheerful, and eat and drink, and sleep quietly, and go on in sin,
   provoking the wrath of God more and more, without any great matter of
   concern! How stupid and sottish are such persons! Let such senseless
   sinners consider, that that misery, of which they are in danger from
   the wrath of God, is infinitely more terrible than that, the fear of
   which occasioned in Christ his agony and bloody sweat. It is more
   terrible, both as it differs both in its nature and degree, and also as
   it differs in its duration. It is more terrible in its nature and
   degree. Christ suffered that which, as it upheld the honour of the
   divine law, was fully equivalent to the misery of the damned; and in
   some respect it was the same suffering; for it was the wrath of the
   same God; but yet in other respects it vastly differed. The difference
   does not arise from the difference in the wrath poured out on one and
   the other, for it is the same wrath, but from the difference of the
   subject, which may be best illustrated from Christ's own comparison.
   Luke 23:31. "For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be
   done in the dry?" Here he calls himself the green tree, and wicked men
   the dry, intimating that the misery that will come on wicked men will
   be far more dreadful than those sufferings which came on him, and the
   difference arises from the different nature of the subject. The green
   tree and the dry are both cast into the fire; but the flames seize and
   kindle on the dry tree much more fiercely than on the green. The
   sufferings that Christ endured differ from the misery of the wicked in
   hell in nature and degree in the following respects.

   1. Christ felt not the gnawings of a guilty, condemning conscience.

   2. He felt no torment from the reigning of inward corruptions and lusts
   as the damned do. The wicked in hell are their own tormentors, their
   lusts are their tormentors, and being without restraint, (for there is
   no restraining grace in hell,) their lusts will rage like raging flames
   in their hearts. They shall be tormented with the unrestrained violence
   of a spirit of envy and malice against God, and against the angels and
   saints in heaven, and against one another. Now Christ suffered nothing
   of this.

   3. Christ had not to consider that God hated him. The wicked in hell
   have this to make their misery perfect, they know that God perfectly
   hates them without the least pity or regard to them, which will fill
   their souls with inexpressible misery. But it was not so with Christ.
   God withdrew his comfortable presence from Christ, and hid his face
   from him, and so poured out his wrath upon him, as made him feel its
   terrible effects in his soul; but yet he knew at the same time that God
   did not hate him, but infinitely loved him. He cried out of God's
   forsaking him, but yet at the same time calls him "My God, my God!"
   knowing that he was his God still, though he had forsaken him. But the
   wicked in hell will know that he is not their God, but their judge and
   irreconcilable enemy.

   4. Christ did not suffer despair, as the wicked do in hell. He knew
   that there would be an end to his sufferings in a few hours; and that
   after that he should enter into eternal glory. But it will be far
   otherwise with you that are impenitent; if you die in your present
   condition, you will be in perfect despair. On these accounts, the
   misery of the wicked in hell will be immensely more dreadful in nature
   and degree, than those sufferings with the fears of which Christ's soul
   was so much overwhelmed.

   2. It will infinitely differ in duration. Christ's sufferings lasted
   but a few hours, and there was an eternal end to them, and eternal
   glory succeeded. But you that are a secure, senseless sinner, are every
   day exposed to be cast into everlasting misery, a fire that never shall
   be quenched. If then the Son of God was in such amazement, in the
   expectation of what he was to suffer for a few hours, how sottish are
   you who are continually exposed to sufferings, immensely more dreadful
   in nature and degree, and that are to be without any end, but which
   must be endured without any rest day or night for ever and ever! If you
   had a full sense of the greatness of that misery to which you are
   exposed, and how dreadful your present condition is on that account, it
   would this moment put you into as dreadful an agony as that which
   Christ underwent; yea, if your nature could endure it, one much more
   dreadful. We should now see you fall down in a bloody sweat, wallowing
   in your gore, and crying out in terrible amazement.

   Having thus endeavoured to explain and illustrate the former of the two
   propositions mentioned in the commencement of this discourse, I shall
   now proceed to show,

   II. That the soul of Christ in his agony in the garden was in a great
   and earnest strife and conflict in his prayer to God. The labour and
   striving of Christ's soul in prayer was a part of his agony, and was
   without doubt a part of what is intended in the text, when it is said
   that Christ was in an agony; for, as we have shown, the word is
   especially used in Scripture in other places for striving or wrestling
   with God in prayer. From this fact, and from the evangelist mentioning
   his being in agony, and his praying earnestly in the same sentence, we
   may well understand him as mentioning his striving in prayer as part of
   his agony. The words of the text seem to hold forth as much as that
   Christ was in an agony in prayer: "Being in an agony, he prayed more
   earnestly; and his sweat was, as it were, great drops of blood falling
   to the ground." This language seems to imply thus much, that the labour
   and earnestness of Christ's soul was so great in his wrestling with God
   in prayer, that he was in a mere agony, and all over in a sweat of
   blood.

   What I propose now, in this second proposition, is by the help of God
   to explain this part of Christ's agony which consisted in the agonizing
   and wrestling of his soul in prayer; which is the more worthy of a
   particular inquiry, being that which probably is but little understood;
   though, as may appear in the sequel, the right understanding of it is
   of great use and consequence in divinity. It is not as I conceive
   ordinarily well understood what is meant when it is said in the text
   that Christ prayed more earnestly; or what was the thing that he
   wrestled with God for, or what was the subject matter of this earnest
   prayer, or what was the reason of his being so very earnest in prayer
   at this time. And therefore, to set this whole matter in a clear light,
   I would particularly inquire,

   1. Of what nature this prayer was;

   2. What was the subject matter of this earnest prayer of Christ to the
   Father;

   3. In what capacity Christ offered up this prayer to God;

   4. Why he was so earnest in his prayer;

   5. What was the success of this his earnest wrestling with God in
   prayer; and then make some improvement.

   I. Of what nature this prayer of Christ was.

   Addresses that are made to God may be of various kinds. Some are
   confessions on the part of the individual, or expressions of his sense
   of his own unworthiness before God, and are thus penitential addresses
   to God. Others are doxologies or prayers intended to express the sense
   which the person has of God's greatness and glory. Such are many of the
   psalms of David. Others are gratulatory addresses, or expressions of
   thanksgiving and praise for mercies received. Others are submissive
   addresses, or expressions of submission and resignation to the will of
   God, whereby he that addresses the Majesty of heaven, expresses the
   compliance of his will with the sovereign will of God; saying, "Thy
   will, O Lord, be done!" as David, 2 Sam. 15:26. "But if he thus say, I
   have no delight in thee; behold, here am I; let him do to me as seemeth
   good unto him." Others are petitory or supplicatory; whereby the person
   that prays, begs of God and cries to him for some favour desired of
   him.

   Hence the inquiry is, of which of these kinds was the prayer of Christ,
   that we read of in the text.

   Answer. It was chiefly supplicatory. It was not penitential or
   confessional; for Christ had no sin or unworthiness to confess. Nor was
   it a doxology or a thanksgiving or merely an expression of submission;
   for none of these agree with what is said in the text, viz. that he
   prayed more earnestly. When any one is said to pray earnestly, it
   implies an earnest request for some benefit, or favour desired; and not
   merely a confession, or submission, or gratulation. So what the apostle
   says of this prayer, in Heb. 5:7. "Who in the days of his flesh, when
   he had offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and
   tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard, in
   that he feared," shows that it was petitory, or an earnest supplication
   for some desired benefit. They are not confessions, or doxologies, or
   thanksgivings. or resignations, that are called "supplications" and
   "strong cyings," but petitions for some benefit earnestly desired. And
   having thus resolved the first inquiry, and shown that this earnest
   prayer of Christ -was of the nature of a supplication for some benefit
   or favour which Christ earnestly desired, I come to inquire,

   II. What was the subject matter of this supplication; or what favour
   and benefit that was for which Christ so earnestly supplicated in this
   prayer of which we have an account in the text. Now the words of the
   text are not express on this matter. It is said that Christ, "being in
   an agony, prayed more earnestly;" but yet it is not said what he prayed
   so earnestly for. And here is the greatest difficulty attending this
   account: even what that was which Christ so earnestly desired, for
   which he so wrestled with God at that time. And though we are not
   expressly told in the text, yet the Scriptures have not left us without
   sufficient light in this matter. And the more effectually to avoid
   mistakes, I would answer,

   1. Negatively, the thing that Christ so earnestly prayed for at this
   time, was not that the bitter cup which he had to drink might pass from
   him. Christ had before prayed for this, as in the next verse but one
   before the text, saying "Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup
   from me! nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done!" It is after
   this that we have an account that Christ being in an agony, prayed more
   earnestly; but we are not to understand that he prayed more earnestly
   than he had done before, that the cup might pass from him. That this
   was not the thing that he so earnestly prayed for in this second
   prayer, the following things seem to prove:

   1. This second prayer was after the angel had appeared to him from
   heaven, strengthening him, the more cheerfully to take the cup and
   drink it. The evangelists inform us that when Christ came into the
   garden, he began to be sorrowful, and very heavy, and that he said his
   soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, and that then he went
   and prayed to God, that if it were possible the cup might pass from
   him. Luke says in the 41st and 42nd verses, "that being withdrawn from
   his disciples about a stone's cast, he kneeled down and prayed, saying,
   Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me; nevertheless, not
   my will, but thine be done!" And then, after this, it is said in the
   next verse, that there appeared an angel from heaven unto him
   strengthening him. Now this can be understood no otherwise than that
   the angel appeared to him, strengthening him and encouraging him to go
   through his great and difficult work, to take the cup and drink it.
   Accordingly we must suppose, that now Christ was more strengthened and
   encouraged to go through with his sufferings: and therefore we cannot
   suppose that after this he would pray more earnestly than before to be
   delivered from his sufferings; and of course that it was something else
   that Christ more earnestly prayed for, after that strengthening of the
   angel, and not that the cup might pass from him. Though Christ seems to
   have a greater sight of his sufferings given him after this
   strengthening of the angel than before, that caused such an agony, yet
   he was more strengthened to fit him for a greater sight of them, he had
   greater strength and courage to grapple with these awful apprehensions,
   than before. His strength to bear sufferings is increased with the
   sense of his sufferings.

   2. Christ, before his second prayer, had had an intimation from the
   Father, that it was not his will that the cup should pass from him. The
   angel's coming from heaven to strengthen him must be so understood.
   Christ first prays, that if it may be the will of the Father, the cup
   might pass; but not, if it was not his will; and then God immediately
   upon this sends an angel to strengthen, and encourage him to take the
   cup, which was a plain intimation to Christ that it was the Father's
   will that he should take it, and that it should not pass from him. And
   so Christ received it; as appears from the account which Matthew gives
   of this second prayer. Matt. 26:42. "He went away again the second time
   and prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me
   except I drink it, thy will be done." He speaks as one that now had had
   an intimation, since he prayed before, that it was not the will of God.
   And Luke tells us how, viz. by God's sending an angel. Matthew informs
   us, as Luke does, that in his first prayer, he prayed that if it were
   possible the cup might pass from him; but then God sends an angel to
   signify that it was not his will, and to encourage him to take it. And
   then Christ having received this plain intimation that it was not the
   will of God that the cup should pass from him, yields to the message he
   had received, and says, O my Father, if it be so as thou hast now
   signified, thy will be done. Therefore we may surely conclude that what
   Christ prayed more earnestly for after this, was not that the cup might
   pass from him, but something else; for he would not go to pray more
   earnestly that the cup might pass from him, after God had signified
   that it was not his will that it should pass from him, than he did
   before; that would be blasphemous to suppose. And then,

   3dly, The language of the second prayer, as recited by Matthew, "O my
   Father, if this cup may not pass from me except I drink it, thy will be
   done," shows that Christ did not then pray that the cup might pass from
   him. This certainly is not praying more earnestly that the cup might
   pass: it is rather a yielding that point, and ceasing any more to urge
   it, and submitting to it as a thing now determined by the will of God,
   made known by the angel. And,

   4. From the apostle's account of this prayer in the 5th ch. of Hebrews,
   the words of the apostle are these, "Who in the days of his flesh, when
   he had offered up his prayers and supplications, with strong crying and
   tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in
   that he feared." The strong crying and tears of which the apostle
   speaks, are doubtless the same that Luke speaks of in the text, when he
   says, "he being in an agony, prayed more earnestly;" for this was the
   sharpest and most earnest crying of Christ, of which we have any where
   any account. But according to the apostle's account, that which Christ
   feared, and that for which he so strongly cried to God in this prayer,
   was something that he was heard in, something that God granted him his
   request in, and therefore it was not that the cup might pass from him.
   Having thus shown what it was not that Christ prayed for in this
   earnest prayer, I proceed to show,

   2nd, What it was that Christ so earnestly sought of God in this prayer.

   I answer in one word, it was, That God's will might be done, in what
   related to his sufferings. Matthew gives this express account of it, in
   the very language of the prayer which has been recited several times
   already, "O my Father, if this cup may not pass from me, except I drink
   it, thy will be done!" This is a yielding, and an expression of
   submission; but it is not merely that. Such words, "The will of the
   Lord be done," as they are most commonly used, are not understood as a
   supplication or request, but only as an expression of submission. But
   the words are not always to be understood in that sense in Scripture,
   but sometimes are to be understood as a request. So they are to be
   understood in the third petition of the Lord's prayer, "Thy will be
   done in earth as in heaven." There the words are to be understood both
   as an expression of submission, and also a request, as they are
   explained in the Assembly's Catechism, and so the words are to be
   understood here. The evangelist Mark says that Christ went away again
   and spake the same words that he had done in his first prayer. Mark
   14:39. But then we must understand it as of the same words with the
   latter part of his first prayer, "nevertheless not my will but thine be
   done," as Matthew's more full and particular account shows. So that the
   thing mentioned in the text, for which Christ was wrestling with God in
   this prayer, was, that God's will might be done in what related to his
   sufferings.

   But then here another inquiry may arise, viz. What is implied in
   Christ's praying that God's will might be done in what related to his
   sufferings? To this I answer,

   1. This implies a request that he might be strengthened and supported,
   and enabled to do God's will, by going through with these sufferings.
   The same as when he says, "Lo, I come, in the volume of the book it is
   written of me, to do thy will, O God." It was the preceptive will of
   God that he should take that cup and drink it: it was the Father's
   command to him. The Father had given him the cup, and as it were set it
   down before him with the command that he should drink it. This was the
   greatest act of obedience that Christ was to perform. He prays for
   strength and help, that his poor feeble human nature might be
   supported, that he might not fail in this great trial, that he might
   not sink and be swallowed up, and his strength so overcome that he
   should not hold out, and finish the appointed obedience. This was the
   thing that he feared, of which the apostle speaks in the 5th of
   Hebrews, when he says,"he was heard in that he feared." When he had
   such an extraordinary sense of the dreadfulness of his sufferings
   impressed on his mind, the fearfulness of it amazed him. He was afraid
   lest his poor feeble strength should be overcome, and that he should
   fail in so great a trial, that he should be swallowed up by that death
   that he was to die, and so should not be saved from death; and
   therefore he offered up strong crying and tears unto him that was able
   to strengthen him, and support, and save him from death, that the death
   he was to suffer might not overcome his love and obedience, but that he
   might overcome death, and so be saved from it. If Christ's courage had
   failed in the trial, and he had not held out under his dying
   sufferings, he never would have been saved from death, but he would
   have sunk in the deep mire; he never would have risen from the dead,
   for his rising from the dead was a reward of his victory. If his
   courage had failed, and he had given up, he would have remained from
   under the power of death, and so we should all have perished, we should
   have remained yet in our sins. If he had failed, all would have failed.
   If he had not overcome in that sore conflict, neither he nor we could
   have been freed from death, we all must have perished together.
   Therefore this was the saving from death that the apostle speaks of,
   that Christ feared and prayed for with strong crying and tears. His
   being overcome of death was the thing that he feared, and so he was
   heard in that he feared. This Christ prayed, that the will of God might
   be done in his sufferings, even that he might not fail of obeying God's
   will in his sufferings; and therefore it follows in the next verse in
   that passage of Hebrews, "Though he were a Son, yet learned he
   obedience by the things which he suffered." That it was in this respect
   that Christ in his agony so earnestly prayed that the will of God might
   be done, viz. that he might have strength to do his will, and might not
   sink and fail in such great sufferings; is confirmed from the
   scriptures of the Old Testament, as particularly from the 69th Psalm.
   The psalmist represents Christ in that psalm, as is evident from the
   fact that the words of that psalm are represented as Christ's words in
   many places of the New Testament. That psalm is represented as Christ's
   prayer to God when his soul was overwhelmed with sorrow and amazement,
   as it was in his agony; as you may see in the 1st and 2nd verses, "Save
   me, O God, for the waters are come in unto my soul: I sink in deep
   mire, where there is no standing: I am come into deep waters, where the
   floods overflow me." But then the thing that is represented as being
   the thing that he feared, was failing, and being overwhelmed, in this
   great trial: verses 14 and 15. "Deliver me out of the mire, and let me
   not sink: let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the
   deep waters. Let not the water- flood overflow me, neither let the deep
   swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me." So again in
   the 22d Psalm, which is also represented as the prayer of Christ under
   his dreadful sorrow and sufferings, verses 19, 20, 21. "But be not thou
   far from me, O Lord; O my Strength, haste thee to help me. Deliver my
   soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the dog. Save me from
   the lion's mouth." It was meet and suitable that Christ, when about to
   engage in that terrible conflict, should thus earnestly seek help from
   God to enable him to do his will; for he needed God's help--the
   strength of his human nature, without divine help, was not sufficient
   to carry him through. This was, without doubt, that in which the first
   Adam failed in his first trial, that when the trial came he was not
   sensible of his own weakness and dependence. If he had been, and had
   leaned on God, and cried to him for his assistance and strength against
   the temptation, in all likelihood we should have remained innocent and
   happy creatures to this day.

   2. It implies a request that God's will and purpose might be obtained
   in the effects and fruits of his sufferings, in the glory to his name,
   that was his design in them; and particularly in the glory of his
   grace, in the eternal salvation and happiness of his elect. This is
   confirmed by John 12:27,28. "Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I
   say?-- Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto
   this hour. Father, glorify thy name. Then came there a voice from
   heaven, saying, I have both glorified, and will glorify it again."
   There the first request is the same with the first request of Christ
   here in like trouble: "Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say?
   Father, save me from this hour." He first prays, as he does here, that
   he might be saved from his last sufferings. Then, after he was
   determined within himself that the will of God must be otherwise, that
   he should not be saved from that hour, "but for this cause," says he,
   "came I to this hour;" and then his second request after this is,
   "Father, glorify thy name!" So this is doubtless the purport of the
   second request in his agony, when he prayed that God's will might be
   done. It is that God's will might be done in that glory to his own name
   that he intended in the effects and fruits of his sufferings, that
   seeing that it was his will that he should suffer, he earnestly prays
   that the end of his suffering, in the glory of God and the salvation of
   the elect, may not fail. And these things are what Christ so earnestly
   wrestled with God for in his prayer, of which we have an account in the
   text, and we have no reason to think that they were not expressed in
   prayer as well as implied. It is not reasonable to suppose that the
   evangelist in his other account of things mentions all the words of
   Christ's prayer. He only mentions the substance.

   III. In what capacity did Christ offer up those earnest prayers to God
   in his agony?

   In answer to this inquiry, I observe that he offered them up not as a
   private person, but as high priest. The apostle speaks of the strong
   crying and tears, as what Christ offered up as high priest. Heb. 5:6-7.
   "As he says also in another place, Thou art a priest for ever, after
   the order of Melchisedek: who in the days of his flesh, when he had
   offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears,"
   etc. The things that Christ prayed for in those strong cryings, were
   things not of a private nature, but of common concern to the whole
   church of which he was the high priest. That the will of God should be
   done in his obedience unto death, that his strength and courage should
   not fail, but that he should hold out, was of common concern; for, if
   he had failed, all would have failed and perished for ever. And of
   course, that God's name should be glorified in the effects and fruits
   of his sufferings, and in the salvation and glory of all his elect, was
   a thing of common concern. Christ offered up these strong cries with
   his flesh in the same manner as the priests of old were wont to offer
   up prayers with their sacrifices. Christ mixed strong crying and tears
   with his blood, and so offered up his blood and his prayers together,
   that the effect and success of his blood might be obtained. Such
   earnest agonizing prayers were offered with his blood, and his
   infinitely precious and meritorious blood was offered with his prayers.

   IV. Why was Christ so earnest in those supplications? Luke speaks of
   them as very earnest; the apostle speaks of them as strong crying; and
   his agony partly consisted in this earnestness: and the account that
   Luke gives us, seems to imply that his bloody sweat was partly at least
   with the great labour and earnest sense of his soul in wrestling with
   God in prayer. There were three things that concurred at that time,
   especially to cause Christ to be thus earnest and engaged.

   1. He had then an extraordinary sense how dreadful the consequence
   would be, if God's will should fail of being done. He had then an
   extraordinary sense of his own last suffering under the wrath of God,
   and if he had failed in those sufferings, he knew the consequence must
   be dreadful. He having now such an extraordinary view of the
   terribleness of the wrath of God, his love to the elect tended to make
   him more than ordinarily earnest that they might be delivered from
   suffering that wrath to all eternity, which could not have been if he
   had failed of doing God's will, or if the will of God in the effect of
   his suffering had failed.

   2. No wonder that that extraordinary sense that Christ then had of the
   costliness of the means of sinners' salvation, made him very earnest
   for the success of those means, as you have already heard.

   3. Christ had an extraordinary sense of his dependence on God, and his
   need of his help to enable him to do God's will in this great trial.
   Though he was innocent, yet he needed divine help. He was dependent on
   God, as man, and therefore we read that he trusted in God. Matt. 27:43.
   "He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for
   he said, I am the Son of God." And when he had such an extraordinary
   sight of the dreadfulness of that wrath he was to suffer, he saw how
   much it was beyond the strength of his human nature alone.

   V. What was the success of this prayer of Christ?

   To this I answer, He obtained all his requests. The apostle says, "He
   was heard in that he feared;" in all that he feared. He obtained
   strength and help from God, all that he needed, and was carried
   through. He was enabled to do and to suffer the whole will of God; and
   he obtained the whole of the end of his sufferings--a full atonement
   for the sins of the whole world, and the full salvation of every one of
   those who were given him in the covenant of redemption, and all that
   glory to the name of God, which his mediation was designed to
   accomplish, not one jot or tittle hath failed. Herein Christ in his
   agony was above all others Jacob's antitype, in his wrestling with God
   for a blessing; which Jacob did, not as a private person, but as the
   head of his posterity, the nation of Israel, and by which he obtained
   that commendation of God, "As a prince thou hast power with God;" and
   therein was a type of him who was the Prince of princes.

APPLICATION.

   Great improvement may be made of the consideration of the strong crying
   and tears of Christ in the days of his flesh, many ways for our
   benefit.

   1. This may teach us after what manner we should pray to God, not in a
   cold and careless manner, but with great earnestness and engagedness of
   spirit, and especially when we are praying to God for those things that
   are of infinite importance, such as spiritual and eternal blessings.
   Such were the benefits that Christ prayed for with such strong crying
   and tears, that he might be enabled to do God's will in that great and
   difficult work that God had appointed him, that he might not sink and
   fail, but might get the victory, and so finally be delivered from
   death, and that God's will and end might be obtained as the fruit of
   his sufferings, in the glory of God, and the salvation of the elect.

   When we go before God in prayer with a cold, dull heart, and in a
   lifeless and listless manner pray to him for eternal blessings, and
   those of infinite import to our souls, we should think of Christ's
   earnest prayers that he poured out to God, with tears and a bloody
   sweat. The consideration of it may well make us ashamed of our dull,
   lifeless prayers to God, wherein, indeed, we rather ask a denial than
   ask to be heard; for the language of such a manner of praying to God,
   is, that we do not look upon the benefit that we pray for as of any
   great importance, that we are indifferent whether God answers us or
   not. The example of Jacob in wrestling with God for the blessing,
   should teach us earnestness in our prayers, but more especially the
   example of Jesus Christ, who wrestled with God in a bloody sweat. If we
   were sensible as Christ was of the great importance of those benefits
   that are of eternal consequence, our prayers to God for such benefits
   would be after another manner than now they are. Our souls also would
   with earnest labour and strife be engaged in this duty.

   There are many benefits that we ask of God in our prayers, which are
   every whit of as great importance to us as those benefits which Christ
   asked of God in his agony were to him. It is of as great importance to
   us that we should be enabled to do the will of God, and perform a
   sincere, universal, and persevering obedience to his commands, as it
   was to Christ that he should not fail of doing God's will in his great
   work. It is of as great importance to us to be saved from death, as it
   was to Christ that he should get the victory over death, and so be
   saved from it. It is of as great, and infinitely greater, importance to
   us, that Christ's redemption should be successful in us, as it was to
   him that God's will should be done, in the fruits and success of his
   redemption.

   Christ recommended earnest watchfulness and prayerfulness to his
   disciples, by prayer and example, both at the same time. When Christ
   was in his agony, and came and found his disciples asleep, he bid them
   watch and pray, Matt. 26:41. "Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
   temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak." At
   the same time he set them an example of that which he commanded them,
   for though they slept he watched, and poured out his soul in those
   earnest prayers that you have heard of; and Christ has elsewhere taught
   us to ask those blessings of God that are of infinite importance, as
   those that will take no denial. We have another example of the great
   conflicts and engagedness of Christ's spirit in this duty. Luke 6:12.
   "And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a mountain to
   pray, and continued all night in prayer to God." And he was often
   recommending earnestness in crying to God in prayers. In the parable of
   the unjust judge, Luke 18 at the beginning; "And he spake a parable
   unto them to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint;
   saying There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither
   regarded man; and there was a widow in that city; and she came unto
   him, saying, Avenge me of mine adversary. And he would not for awhile:
   but afterwards he saith within himself, Though I fear not God nor
   regard man, yet because this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her,
   lest by her continual coming she weary me. And the Lord said, Hear what
   the unjust judge saith." Luke 6:5, etc. "And he said unto them, Which
   of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight, and say
   unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves; for a friend of mine in his
   journey is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him? And he
   from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not: the door is now shut,
   and my children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee. I say
   unto you, though he will not rise and give him because he is his
   friend, yet because of his importunity, he will rise and give him as
   many as he needeth." He taught it in his own way of answering prayer,
   as in answering the woman of Canaan, Matt. 15:22, etc. "And behold a
   woman of Canaan came out of the coasts, and cried unto him, saying,
   Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David; my daughter is grievously
   vexed with a devil. But he answered her not a word. And his disciples
   came and besought him, saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us.
   But he answered and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the
   house of Israel. Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help
   me. But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the children's
   bread and cast it to dogs. And she said, Truth, Lord; yet the dogs eat
   of the crumbs which fall from their master's table. Then Jesus answered
   and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith; be it unto thee even as
   thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from that very hour." And as
   Christ prayed in his agony, so I have already mentioned several texts
   of Scripture wherein we are directed to agonize in our prayers to God.

   2. These earnest prayers and strong cries of Christ to the Father in
   his agony, show the greatness of his love to sinners. For, as has been
   shown, these strong cries of Jesus Christ were what he offered up to
   God as a public person, in the capacity of high priest, and in the
   behalf of those whose priest he was. When he offered up his sacrifice
   for sinners whom he had loved from eternity, he withal offered up
   earnest prayers. His strong cries, his tears, and his blood, were all
   offered up together to God, and they were all offered up for the same
   end, for the glory of God in the salvation of the elect. They were all
   offered up for the same persons, viz. for his people. For them he shed
   his blood and that bloody sweat, when it fell down in clotted lumps to
   the ground; and for them he so earnestly cried to God at the same time.
   It was that the will of God might be done in the success of his
   sufferings, in the success of that blood, in the salvation of those for
   whom that blood was shed, and therefore this strong crying shows his
   strong love; it shows how greatly he desired the salvation of sinners.
   He cried to God that he might not sink and fail in that great
   undertaking, because if he did so, sinners could not be saved, but all
   must perish. He prayed that he might get the victory over death,
   because if he did not get the victory, his people could never obtain
   that victory, and they can conquer no otherwise than by his conquest.
   If the Captain of our salvation had not conquered in this sore
   conflict, none of us could have conquered, but we must have all sunk
   with him. He cried to God that he might be saved from death, and if he
   had not been saved from death in his resurrection, none of us could
   ever have been saved from death. It was a great sight to see Christ in
   that great conflict that he was in in his agony, but every thing in it
   was from love, that strong love that was in his heart. His tears that
   flowed from his eyes were from love; his great sweat was from love; his
   blood, his prostrating himself on the ground before the Father, was
   from love; his earnest crying to God was from the strength and ardency
   of his love. It is looked upon as one principal way wherein true love
   and good will is shown in christian friends one towards another,
   heartily to pray one for another; and it is one way wherein Christ
   directs us to show our love to our enemies, even praying for them.
   Matt. 5:44. "But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that
   curse you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute
   you." But was there ever any prayer that manifested love to enemies to
   such a degree, as those strong cries and tears of the Son of God for
   the success of his blood in the salvation of his enemies; the strife
   and conflict of whose soul in prayer was such as to produce his agony
   and his bloody sweat?

   3. If Christ was thus earnest in prayer to God, that the end of his
   sufferings might be obtained in the salvation of sinners, then how much
   ought those sinners to be reproved that do not earnestly seek their own
   salvation! If Christ offered up such strong cries for sinners as their
   high priest, that bought their salvation, who stood in no need of
   sinners, who had been happy from all eternity without them, and could
   not be made happier by them; then how great is the sottishness of those
   sinners that seek their own salvation in a dull and lifeless manner;
   that content themselves with a formal attendance on the duties of
   religion, with their hearts in the mean time much more earnestly set
   after other things! They after a sort attend on the duty of social
   prayer, wherein they pray to God that he would have mercy on them and
   save them; but after what a poor dull way is it that they do it! they
   do not apply their heart unto wisdom, nor incline their ear to
   understanding; they do not cry after wisdom, nor lift up their voice
   for understanding; they do not seek it as silver, nor search for it as
   for hidden treasures. Christ's earnest cries in his agony may convince
   us that it was not without reason that he insisted upon it, in Luke
   13:24. that we should strive to enter in at the strait gate, which, as
   I have already observed to you, is, in the original, Agwnizesqe,
   "Agonize to enter in at the strait gate." If sinners would be in a
   hopeful way to obtain their salvation, they should agonize in that
   great concern as men that are taking a city by violence, as Matt.
   11:12. "And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of
   heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force." When a
   body of resolute soldiers are attempting to take a strong city in which
   they meet with great opposition, what violent conflicts are there
   before the city is taken! How do the soldiers press on against the very
   mouths of the enemies' cannon, and upon the points of their swords!
   When the soldiers are scaling the walls, and making their first
   entrance into the city, what a violent struggle is there between them
   and their enemies that strive to keep them out! How do they, as it
   were, agonize with all their strength! So ought we to seek our
   salvation, if we would be in a likely way to obtain it. How great is
   the folly then of those who content themselves with seeking with a cold
   and lifeless frame of spirit, and so continue from month to month, and
   from year to year, and yet flatter themselves that they shall be
   successful!

   How much more still are they to be reproved, who are not in a way of
   seeking their salvation at all, but wholly neglect their precious
   souls, and attend the duties of religion no further than is just
   necessary to keep up their credit among men; and instead of pressing
   into the kingdom of God, are rather violently pressing on towards their
   own destruction and ruin, being hurried on by their many head strong
   lusts, as the herd of swine were hurried on by the legion of devils,
   and ran violently down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the
   waters! Matt. 8:32.

   4. From what has been said under this proposition, we may learn after
   what manner Christians ought to go through the work that is before
   them. Christ had a great work before him when that took place, of which
   we have an account in the text. Though it was very near the close of
   his life, yet he then, when his agony began, had the chief part of the
   work before him that he came into the world to do; which was to offer
   up that sacrifice which he offered in his last sufferings, and therein
   to perform the greatest act of his obedience to God. And so the
   Christians have a great work to do, a service they are to perform to
   God, that is attended with great difficulty. They have a race set
   before them that they have to run, a warfare that is appointed them.
   Christ was the subject of a very great trial in the time of his agony;
   so God is wont to exercise his people with great trials. Christ met
   with great opposition in that work that he had to do; so believers are
   like to meet with great opposition in running the race that is set
   before them. Christ, as man, had a feeble nature, that was in itself
   very insufficient to sustain such a conflict, or to support such a load
   as was coming upon him. So the saints have the same weak human nature,
   and beside that, great sinful infirmities that Christ had not, which
   lay them under great disadvantages, and greatly enhance the difficulty
   of their work. Those great tribulations and difficulties that were
   before Christ, were the way in which he was to enter into the kingdom
   of heaven; so his followers must expect, "through much tribulation to
   enter into the kingdom of heaven." The cross was to Christ the way to
   the crown of glory, and so it is to his disciples. The circumstances of
   Christ and of his followers in those things are alike, their case,
   therefore, is the same; and therefore Christ's behaviour under those
   circumstances, was a fit example for them to follow. They should look
   to their Captain, and observe after what manner he went through his
   great work, and the great tribulations which he endured. They should
   observe after what manner he entered into the kingdom of heaven, and
   obtained the crown of glory, and so they also should run the race that
   is set before them. "Wherefore, seeing we also are compassed about with
   so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the
   sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the
   race that is set before us. Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher
   of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
   cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the
   throne of God." Particularly,

   (1.) When others are asleep they should be awake, as it was with
   Christ. The time of Christ's agony was the night season, the time
   wherein persons were wont to be asleep: it was the time wherein the
   disciples that were about Christ were asleep; but Christ then had
   something else to do than to sleep; he had a great work to do; he kept
   awake, with his heart engaged in this work. So should it be with the
   believers of Christ; when the souls of their neighbours are asleep in
   their sins, and under the power of a lethargic insensibility and sloth,
   they should watch and pray, and maintain a lively sense of the infinite
   importance of their spiritual concerns. 1 Thess. 5:6. "Therefore let us
   not sleep, as do others, but let us watch and be sober."

   (2.) They should go through their work with earnest labour, as Christ
   did. The time when others were asleep was a time when Christ was about
   his great work, and was engaged in it with all his might, agonizing in
   it; conflicting and wrestling, in tears, and in blood. So should
   Christians with the utmost earnestness improve their time with souls
   engaged in this work, pushing through the opposition they meet with in
   it, pushing through all difficulties and sufferings there are in the
   way, running with patience the race set before them, conflicting with
   the enemies of their souls with all their might; as those that wrestle
   not with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers, and the
   rulers of the darkness of this world, and spiritual wickedness in high
   places.

   (3.) This labour and strife should be, that God may be glorified, and
   their own eternal happiness obtained in a way of doing God's will. Thus
   it was with Christ: what he so earnestly strove for was, that he might
   do the will of God, that he might keep his command, his difficult
   command, without failing in it, and that in this way God's will might
   be done, in that glory to his ever great name, and that salvation to
   his elect that he intended by his sufferings. Here is an example for
   the saints to follow in that holy strife, and race, and warfare, which
   God has appointed them; they should strive to do the will of their
   heavenly Father, that they may, as the apostle expresses it, Rom. 12:2.
   "Prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God," and
   that in this way they may glorify God, and may come at last to be happy
   for ever in the enjoyment of God.

   (4.) In all the great work they have to do, their eye should be to God
   for his help to enable them to overcome. Thus did the man Christ Jesus:
   he strove in his work even to such an agony and bloody sweat. But how
   did he strive? It was not in his own strength, but his eyes were to
   God, he cries unto him for his help and strength to uphold him, that he
   might not fail; he watched and prayed, as he desired his disciples to
   do; he wrestled with his enemies and with his great sufferings, but at
   the same time wrestled with God to obtain his help, to enable him to
   get the victory. Thus the saints should use their strength in their
   christian course to the utmost, but not as depending on their own
   strength, but crying mightily to God for his strength to make them
   conquerors.

   (5.) In this way they should hold out to the end as Christ did. Christ
   in this way was successful, and obtained the victory, and won the
   prize; he overcame, and is set down with the Father in his throne. So
   Christians should persevere and hold out in their great work to the
   end; they should continue to run their race till they have come to the
   end of it; they should be faithful unto the death as Christ was; and
   then, when they have overcome, they shall sit down with him in his
   throne. Rev. 3:21. "To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me
   in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father
   in his throne."

   5. Hence burdened and distressed sinners, if any such are here present,
   may have abundant ground of encouragement to come to Christ for
   salvation. Here is great encouragement to sinners to come to this high
   priest that offered up such strong crying and tears with his blood, for
   the success of his sufferings in the salvation of sinners. For,

   1st, Here is great ground of assurance that Christ stands ready to
   accept of sinners, and bestow salvation upon them; for those strong
   cries of his that he offered up in the capacity of our high priest,
   show how earnestly desirous he was of it. If he was not willing that
   sinners should be saved, be they ever so unworthy of it, then why would
   he so wrestle with God for it in such a bloody sweat? Would any one so
   earnestly cry to God with such costly cries, in such great labour and
   travail of soul, for that, that he did not desire that God should
   bestow? No, surely! but this shows how greatly his heart was set on the
   success of his redemption; and therefore since he has by such earnest
   prayers, and by such a bloody sweat, obtained salvation of the Father
   to bestow on sinners, he will surely be ready to bestow it upon them,
   if they come to him for it; otherwise he will frustrate his own design;
   and he that so earnestly cried to God that his design might not be
   frustrated, will not, after all, frustrate it himself.

   2. Here is the strongest ground of assurance that God stands ready to
   accept of all those that come to him for mercy through Christ, for this
   is what Christ prayed for in those earnest prayers, whose prayers were
   always heard, as Christ says, John 11:42. "And I knew that thou hearest
   me always." And especially may they conclude, that heard their high
   priest in those strong cries that he offered up with his blood, and
   that especially on the following account.

   (1.) They were the most earnest prayers that ever were made. Jacob was
   very earnest when he wrestled with God; and many others have wrestled
   with God with many tears; yea, doubtless, many of the saints have
   wrestled with God with such inward labour and strife as to produce
   powerful effects on the body. But so earnest was Christ, so strong was
   the labour and fervency of his heart, that he cried to God in a sweat
   of blood; so that if any earnestness and importunity in prayer ever
   prevailed with God, we may conclude that that prevailed.

   (2.) He who then prayed was the most worthy person that ever put up a
   prayer. He had more worthiness than ever men or angels had in the sight
   of God, according as by inheritance he has obtained a more excellent
   name than they; for he was the only-begotten Son of God, infinitely
   lovely in his sight, the Son in whom he declared once and again he was
   well-pleased. He was infinitely near and dear to God, and had more
   worthiness in his eyes ten thousand times than all men and angels put
   together. And can we suppose any other than that such a person was
   heard when he cried to God with such earnestness? Did Jacob, a poor
   sinful man, when he had wrestled with God, obtain of God the name of
   ISRAEL, and that encomium, that as a prince he had power with God, and
   prevailed? And did Elijah, who was a man of like passions, and of like
   corruptions with us, when he prayed, earnestly prevail on God to work
   such great wonders? And shall not the only-begotten Son of God, when
   wrestling with God in tears and blood, prevail, and have his request
   granted him?

   Surely there is no room to suppose any such thing; and therefore, there
   is no room to doubt whether God will bestow salvation on those that
   believe in him, at his request.

   (3.) Christ offered up these earnest prayers with the best plea for an
   answer that ever was offered to God, viz. his own blood; which was an
   equivalent for the thing that he asked. He not only offered up strong
   cries, but he offered them up with a price fully sufficient to purchase
   the benefit he asked.

   (4.) Christ offered this price and those strong cries both together;
   for at the same time that he was pouring out these earnest requests for
   the success of his redemption in the salvation of sinners, he also shed
   his blood. His blood fell down to the ground at the same instant that
   his cries went up to heaven. Let burdened and distressed sinners, that
   are ready to doubt of the efficacy of Christ's intercession for such
   unworthy creatures as they, and to call in question God's readiness to
   accept them for Christ's sake, consider these things. Go to the garden
   where the Son of God was in an agony, and where he cried to God so
   earnestly, and where his sweat was, as it were, great drops of blood,
   and then see what a conclusion you will draw up from such a wonderful
   sight.

   6. The godly may take great comfort in this, that Christ has as their
   high priest offered up such strong cries to God. You that have good
   evidence of your being believers in Christ, and his true followers and
   servants, may comfort yourselves in this, that Christ Jesus is your
   high priest, that that blood, which Christ shed in his agony, fell down
   to the ground for you, and that those earnest cries were sent up to God
   for you, for the success of his labours and sufferings in all that good
   you stood in need of in this world, and in your everlasting happiness
   in the world to come. This may be a comfort to you in all losses, and
   under all difficulties, that you may encourage your faith, and
   strengthen your hope, and cause you greatly to rejoice. If you were
   under any remarkable difficulties, it would be a great comfort to you
   to have the prayers of some man that you looked upon to be a man of
   eminent piety, and one that had a great interest at the throne of
   grace, and especially if you knew that he was very earnest and greatly
   engaged in prayer for you. But how much more may you be comforted in
   it, that you have an interest in the prayers and cries of the
   only-begotten and infinitely worthy Son of God, and that he was so
   earnest in his prayers for you, as you have heard!

   7. Hence we may learn how earnest Christians ought to be in their
   prayers and endeavours for the salvation of others. Christians are the
   followers of Christ, and they should follow him in this. We see from
   what we have heard, how great the labour and travail of Christ's soul
   was for others' salvation, and what earnest and strong cries to God
   accompanied his labours. Here he hath set us an example. Herein he hath
   set an example for ministers, who should as co-workers with Christ
   travail in birth with them till Christ be found in them. Gal. 4:19. "My
   little children, of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be
   formed in you." They should be willing to spend and be spent for them.
   They should not only labour for them, and pray earnestly for them, but
   should, if occasion required, be ready to suffer for them, and to spend
   not only their strength, but their blood for them. 2 Cor. 12:15. "And I
   will very gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more abundantly
   I love you, the less I be loved." Here is an example for parents,
   showing how they ought to labour and cry to God for the spiritual good
   of their children. You see how Christ laboured and strove and cried to
   God for the salvation of his spiritual children; and will not you
   earnestly seek and cry to God for your natural children?

   Here is an example for neighbours one towards another how they should
   seek and cry for the good of one another's souls, for this is the
   command of Christ, that they should love one another as Christ loved
   them. John 15:12. Here is an example for us, showing how we should
   earnestly seek and pray for the spiritual and eternal good of our
   enemies, for Christ did all this for his enemies, and when some of
   those enemies were at that very instant plotting his death, and busily
   contriving to satiate their malice and cruelty, in his most extreme
   torments, and most ignominious destruction.
     __________________________________________________________________

                   God's Sovereignty in the Salvation of Men

A Sermon

  by

Jonathan Edwards

    Sermon IV of Seventeen Occasional Sermons, in The Works of Jonathan Edwards,
    Volume Two, The Banner of Truth Trust, Reprinted 1995, pp. 849-854.

      [An [37]outline of the sermon has been prepared by the contributor.]

  Romans 9:18 -- Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
  will he hardeneth.

   THE apostle, in the beginning of this chapter, expresses his great
   concern and sorrow of heart for the nation of the Jews, who were
   rejected of God. This leads him to observe the difference which God
   made by election between some of the Jews and others, and between the
   bulk of that people and the christian Gentiles. In speaking of this he
   enters into a more minute discussion of the sovereignty of God in
   electing some to eternal life, and rejecting others, than is found in
   any other part of the Bible; in the course of which he quotes several
   passages from the Old Testament, confirming and illustrating this
   doctrine. In the ninth verse he refers us to what God said to Abraham,
   showing his election of Isaac before Ishmael - "For this is the word of
   promise; At this time will I come, and Sarah shall have a son:" then to
   what God had said to Rebecca, showing his election of Jacob before
   Esau; "The elder shall serve the younger:" in the thirteenth verse, to
   a passage from Malachi, "Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated:" in
   the fifteenth verse, to what God said to Moses, "I will have mercy on
   whom I will have mercy; and I will have compassion on whom I will have
   compassion:" and the verse preceding the text, to what God says to
   Pharaoh, "For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same
   purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and
   that my name might be declared throughout all the earth." In what the
   apostle says in the text, he seems to have respect especially to the
   two last-cited passages: to what God said to Moses in the fifteenth
   verse, and to what he said to Pharaoh in the verse immediately
   preceding. God said to Moses, "I will have mercy on whom I will have
   mercy." To this the apostle refers in the former part of the text. And
   we know how often it is said of Pharaoh, that God hardened his heart.
   And to this the apostle seems to have respect in the latter part of the
   text; "and whom he will he hardeneth." We may observe in the text,

   1. God's different dealing with men. He hath mercy on some, and
   hardeneth others. When God is here spoken of as hardening some of the
   children of men, it is not to be understood that God by any positive
   efficiency hardens any man's heart. There is no positive act in God, as
   though he put forth any power to harden the heart. To suppose any such
   thing would be to make God the immediate author of sin. God is said to
   harden men in two ways: by withholding the powerful influences of his
   Spirit, without which their hearts will remain hardened, and grow
   harder and harder; in this sense he hardens them, as he leaves them to
   hardness. And again, by ordering those things in his providence which,
   through the abuse of their corruption, become the occasion of their
   hardening. Thus God sends his word and ordinances to men which, by
   their abuse, prove an occasion of their hardening. So the apostle said,
   that he was unto some "a savour of death unto death." So God is
   represented as sending Isaiah on this errand, to make the hearts of the
   people fat, and to make their ears heavy, and to shut their eyes; lest
   they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
   understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed. Isa. 6:10.
   Isaiah's preaching was, in itself, of a contrary tendency, to make them
   better. But their abuse of it rendered it an occasion of their
   hardening. As God is here said to harden men, so he is said to put a
   lying spirit in the mouth of the false prophets. 2 Chron. 18:22. That
   is, he suffered a lying spirit to enter into them. And thus he is said
   to have bid Shimei curse David. 2 Sam. 16:10. Not that he properly
   commanded him; for it is contrary to God's commands. God expressly
   forbids cursing the ruler of the people. Exod. 22:28. But he suffered
   corruption at that time so to work in Shimei, and ordered that occasion
   of stirring it up, as a manifestation of his displeasure against David.

   2. The foundation of his different dealing with mankind; viz. his
   sovereign will and pleasure. "He hath mercy on whom he will have mercy,
   and whom he will he hardeneth." This does not imply, merely, that God
   never shows mercy or denies it against his will, or that he is always
   willing to do it when he does it. A willing subject or servant, when he
   obeys his lord's commands, may never do any thing against his will,
   nothing but what he can do cheerfully and with delight; and yet he
   cannot be said to do what he wills in the sense of the text. But the
   expression implies that it is God's mere will and sovereign pleasure,
   which supremely orders this affair. It is the divine will without
   restraint, or constraint, or obligation.

   Doctrine. God exercises his sovereignty in the eternal salvation of
   men.

   He not only is sovereign, and has a sovereign right to dispose and
   order in that affair; and he not only might proceed in a sovereign way,
   if he would, and nobody could charge him with exceeding his right; but
   he actually does so; he exercises the right which he has. In the
   following discourse, I propose to show,

   [38]I. [1] What is God's sovereignty.
   [39]II. What God's sovereignty in the salvation of men implies.
   [40]III. That God actually doth exercise his sovereignty in this
   matter.
   [41]IV. The reasons for this exercise.

   I. I would show what is God's sovereignty.

   The sovereignty of God is his absolute, independent right of disposing
   of all creatures according to his own pleasure. I will consider this
   definition by the parts of it.

   The will of God is called his mere pleasure,

   1. In opposition to any constraint. Men may do things voluntarily, and
   yet there may be a degree of constraint. A man may be said to do a
   thing voluntarily, that is, he himself does it; and, all things
   considered, he may choose to do it; yet he may do it out of fear, and
   the thing in itself considered be irksome to him, and sorely against
   his inclination. When men do things thus, they cannot be said to do
   them according to their mere pleasure.

   2. In opposition to its being under the will of another. A servant may
   fulfil his master's commands, and may do it willingly, and cheerfully,
   and may delight to do his master's will; yet when he does so, he does
   not do it of his own mere pleasure. The saints do the will of God
   freely. They choose to do it; it is their meat and drink. Yet they do
   not do it of their mere pleasure and arbitrary will; because their will
   is under the direction of a superior will.

   3. In opposition to any proper obligation. A man may do a thing which
   he is obliged to do, very freely; but he cannot be said to act from his
   own mere will and pleasure. He who acts from his own mere pleasure, is
   at full liberty; but he who is under any proper obligation, is not at
   liberty, but is bound. Now the sovereignty of God supposes, that he has
   a right to dispose of all his creatures according to his mere pleasure
   in the sense explained. And his right is absolute and independent. Men
   may have a right to dispose of some things according to their pleasure.
   But their right is not absolute and unlimited. Men may be said to have
   a right to dispose of their own goods as they please. But their right
   is not absolute; is has limits and bounds. They have a right to dispose
   of their own goods as they please, provided they do not do it contrary
   to the law of the state to which they are subject, or contrary to the
   law of God. Men's right to dispose of their things as they will, is not
   absolute, because it is not independent. They have not an independent
   right to what they have, but in some things depend on the community to
   which they belong, for the right they have; and in every thing depend
   on God. They receive all the right they have to any thing from God. But
   the sovereignty of God imports that he has an absolute, and unlimited,
   and independent right of disposing of his creatures as he will. I
   proposed to inquire,

   II. What God's sovereignty in the salvation of men implies. In answer
   to this inquiry, I observe, it implies that God can either bestow
   salvation on any of the children of men, or refuse it, without any
   prejudice to the glory of any of his attributes, except where he has
   been pleased to declare, that he will or will not bestow it. It cannot
   be said absolutely, as the case now stands, that God can, without any
   prejudice to the honour of any of his attributes, bestow salvation on
   any of the children of men, or refuse it; because, concerning some, God
   has been pleased to declare either that he will or that he will not
   bestow salvation on them; and thus to bind himself by his own promise.
   And concerning some he has been pleased to declare, that he never will
   bestow salvation upon them; viz. those who have committed the sin
   against the Holy Ghost. Hence, as the case now stands, he is obliged;
   he cannot bestow salvation in one case, or refuse it in the other,
   without prejudice to the honour of his truth. But God exercised his
   sovereignty in making these declarations. God was not obliged to
   promise that he would save all who believe in Christ; nor was he
   obliged to declare, that he who committed the sin against the Holy
   Ghost should never be forgiven. But it pleased him so to declare. And
   had it not been so that God had been pleased to oblige himself in these
   cases, he might still have either bestowed salvation, or refused it,
   without prejudice to any of his attributes. If it would in itself be
   prejudicial to any of his attributes to bestow or refuse salvation,
   then God would not in that matter act as absolutely sovereign. Because
   it then ceases to be a merely arbitrary thing. It ceases to be a matter
   of absolute liberty, and is become a matter of necessity or obligation.
   For God cannot do any thing to the prejudice of any of his attributes,
   or contrary to what is in itself excellent and glorious. Therefore,

   1. God can, without prejudice to the glory of any of his attributes,
   bestow salvation on any of the children of men, except on those who
   have committed the sin against the Holy Ghost. The case was thus when
   man fell, and before God revealed his eternal purpose and plan for
   redeeming men by Jesus Christ. It was probably looked upon by the
   angels as a thing utterly inconsistent with God's attributes to save
   any of the children of men. It was utterly inconsistent with the honour
   of the divine attributes to save any one of the fallen children of men,
   as they were in themselves. It could not have been done had not God
   contrived a way consistent with the honour of his holiness, majesty,
   justice, and truth. But since God in the gospel has revealed that
   nothing is too hard for him to do, nothing beyond the reach of his
   power, and wisdom, and sufficiency; and since Christ has wrought out
   the work of redemption, and fulfilled the law by obeying, there is none
   of mankind whom he may not save without any prejudice to any of his
   attributes, excepting those who have committed the sin against the Holy
   Ghost. And those he might have saved without going contrary to any of
   his attributes, had he not been pleased to declare that he would not.
   It was not because he could not have saved them consistently with his
   justice, and consistently with his law, or because his attribute of
   mercy was not great enough, or the blood of Christ not sufficient to
   cleanse from that sin. But it has pleased him for wise reasons to
   declare that that sin shall never be forgiven in this world, or in the
   world to come. And so now it is contrary to God's truth to save such.
   But otherwise there is no sinner, let him be ever so great, but God can
   save him without prejudice to any attribute; if he has been a murderer,
   adulterer, or perjurer, or idolater, or blasphemer, God may save him if
   he pleases, and in no respect injure his glory. Though persons have
   sinned long, have been obstinate, have committed heinous sins a
   thousand times, even till they have grown old in sin, and have sinned
   under great aggravations: let the aggravations be what they may; if
   they have sinned under ever so great light; if they have been
   backsliders, and have sinned against ever so numerous and solemn
   warnings and strivings of the Spirit, and mercies of his common
   providence: though the danger of such is much greater than of other
   sinners, yet God can save them if he pleases, for the sake of Christ,
   without any prejudice to any of his attributes. He may have mercy on
   whom he will have mercy. He may have mercy on the greatest of sinners,
   if he pleases, and the glory of none of his attributes will be in the
   least sullied. Such is the sufficiency of the satisfaction and
   righteousness of Christ, that none of the divine attributes stand in
   the way of the salvation of any of them. Thus the glory of any
   attribute did not at all suffer by Christ's saving some of his
   crucifiers.

   1. God may save any of them without prejudice to the honour of his
   holiness. God is an infinitely holy being. The heavens are not pure in
   his sight. He is of purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look on
   iniquity. And if God should in any way countenance sin, and should not
   give proper testimonies of his hatred of it, and displeasure at it, it
   would be a prejudice to the honour of his holiness. But God can save
   the greatest sinner without giving the least countenance to sin. If he
   saves one, who for a long time has stood out under the calls of the
   gospel, and has sinned under dreadful aggravations; if he saves one
   who, against light, has been a pirate or blasphemer, he may do it
   without giving any countenance to their wickedness; because his
   abhorrence of it and displeasure against it have been already
   sufficiently manifested in the sufferings of Christ. It was a
   sufficient testimony of God's abhorrence against even the greatest
   wickedness, that Christ, the eternal Son of God, died for it. Nothing
   can show God's infinite abhorrence of any wickedness more than this. If
   the wicked man himself should be thrust into hell, and should endure
   the most extreme torments which are ever suffered there, it would not
   be a greater manifestation of God's abhorrence of it, than the
   sufferings of the Son of God for it.

   2. God may save any of the children of men without prejudice to the
   honour of his majesty. If men have affronted God, and that ever so
   much, if they have cast ever so much contempt on his authority; yet God
   can save them, if he pleases, and the honour of his majesty not suffer
   in the least. If God should save those who have affronted him, without
   satisfaction, the honour of his majesty would suffer. For when contempt
   is cast upon infinite majesty, its honour suffers, and the contempt
   leaves an obscurity upon the honour of the divine majesty, if the
   injury is not repaired. But the sufferings of Christ do fully repair
   the injury. Let the contempt be ever so great, yet if so honourable a
   person as Christ undertakes to be a Mediator for the offender, and in
   the mediation suffer in his stead, it fully repairs the injury done to
   the majesty of heaven by the greatest sinner.

   3. God may save any sinner whatsoever consistently with his justice.
   The justice of God requires the punishment of sin. God is the Supreme
   Judge of the world, and he is to judge the world according to the rules
   of justice. It is not the part of a judge to show favour to the person
   judged; but he is to determine according to a rule of justice without
   departing to the right hand or left. God does not show mercy as a
   judge, but as a sovereign. And therefore when mercy sought the
   salvation of sinners, the inquiry was how to make the exercise of the
   mercy of God as a sovereign, and of his strict justice as a judge,
   agree together. And this is done by the sufferings of Christ, in which
   sin is punished fully, and justice answered. Christ suffered enough for
   the punishment of the sins of the greatest sinner that ever lived. So
   that God, when he judges, may act according to a rule of strict
   justice, and yet acquit the sinner, if he be in Christ. Justice cannot
   require any more for any man's sins, than those sufferings of one of
   the persons in the Trinity, which Christ suffered. Rom. 3:25,26. "Whom
   God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood; to
   declare his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of
   him which believeth in Christ."

   4. God can save any sinner whatsoever, without any prejudice to the
   honour of his truth. God passed his word, that sin should be punished
   with death, which is to be understood not only of the first, but of the
   second death. God can save the greatest sinner consistently with his
   truth in this threatening. For sin is punished in the sufferings of
   Christ, inasmuch as he is our surety, and so is legally the same
   person, and sustained our guilt, and in his sufferings bore our
   punishment. It may be objected, that God said, If thou eatest, thou
   shalt die; as though the same person that sinned must suffer; and
   therefore why does not God's truth oblige him to that? I answer, that
   the word then was not intended to be restrained to him, that in his own
   person sinned. Adam probably understood that his posterity were
   included, whether they sinned in their own person or not. If they
   sinned in Adam, their surety, those words, "if thou eatest," meant, if
   thou eatest in thyself, or in thy surety. And therefore, the latter
   words, "thou shalt die," do also fairly allow of such a construction
   as, thou shalt die in thyself, or in thy surety. Isa. 42:21. "The Lord
   is well pleased for his righteousness' sake, he will magnify the law
   and make it honourable." But,

   II. God may refuse salvation to any sinner whatsoever, without
   prejudice to the honour of any of his attributes.

   There is no person whatever in a natural condition, upon whom God may
   not refuse to bestow salvation without prejudice to any part of his
   glory. Let a natural person be wise or unwise, of a good or ill natural
   temper, of mean or honourable parentage, whether born of wicked or
   godly parents; let him be a moral or immoral person, whatever good he
   may have done, however religious he has been, how many prayers soever
   he has made, and whatever pains he has taken that he may be saved;
   whatever concern and distress he may have for fear he shall be damned;
   or whatever circumstances he may be in; God can deny him salvation
   without the least disparagement to any of his perfections. His glory
   will not in any instance be the least obscured by it.

   1. God may deny salvation to any natural person without any injury to
   the honour of his righteousness. If he does so, there is no injustice
   nor unfairness in it. There is no natural man living, let his case be
   what it will, but God may deny him salvation, and cast him down to
   hell, and yet not be chargeable with the least unrighteous or unfair
   dealing in any respect whatsoever. This is evident, because they all
   have deserved hell: and it is no injustice for a proper judge to
   inflict on any man what he deserves. And as he has deserved
   condemnation, so he has never done any thing to remove the liability,
   or to atone for the sin. He never has done any thing whereby he has
   laid any obligations on God not to punish him as he deserved.

   2. God may deny salvation to any unconverted person whatever without
   any prejudice to the honour of his goodness. Sinners are sometimes
   ready to flatter themselves, that though it may not be contrary to the
   justice of God to condemn them, yet it will not consist with the glory
   of his mercy. They think it will be dishonourable to God's mercy to
   cast them into hell, and have no pity or compassion upon them. They
   think it will be very hard and severe, and not becoming a God of
   infinite grace and tender compassion. But God can deny salvation to any
   natural person without any disparagement to his mercy and goodness.
   That, which is not contrary to God's justice, is not contrary to his
   mercy. If damnation be justice, then mercy may choose its own object.
   They mistake the nature of the mercy of God, who think that it is an
   attribute, which, in some cases, is contrary to justice. Nay, God's
   mercy is illustrated by it, as in the twenty-third verse of the
   context. "That he might make known the riches of his glory on the
   vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory."

   3. It is in no way prejudicial to the honour of God's faithfulness. For
   God has in no way obliged himself to any natural man by his word to
   bestow salvation upon him. Men in a natural condition are not the
   children of promise; but lie open to the curse of the law, which would
   not be the case if they had any promise to lay hold of.

   III. God does actually exercise his sovereignty in men's salvation.

   We shall show how he exercises this right in several particulars.

   1. In calling one people or nation, and giving them the means of grace,
   and leaving others without them. According to the divine appointment,
   salvation is bestowed in connexion with the means of grace. God may
   sometimes make use of very unlikely means, and bestow salvation on men
   who are under very great disadvantages; but he does not bestow grace
   wholly without any means. But God exercises his sovereignty in
   bestowing those means. All mankind are by nature in like circumstances
   towards God. Yet God greatly distinguishes some from others by the
   means and advantages which he bestows upon them. The savages, who live
   in the remote parts of this continent, and are under the grossest
   heathenish darkness, as well as the inhabitants of Africa, are
   naturally in exactly similar circumstances towards God with us in this
   land. They are no more alienated or estranged from God in their natures
   than we; and God has no more to charge them with. And yet what a vast
   difference has God made between us and them! In this he has exercised
   his sovereignty. He did this of old, when he chose but one people, to
   make them his covenant people, and to give them the means of grace, and
   left all others, and gave them over to heathenish darkness and the
   tyranny of the devil, to perish from generation to generation for many
   hundreds of years. The earth in that time was peopled with many great
   and mighty nations. There were the Egyptians, a people famed for their
   wisdom. There were also the Assyrians and Chaldeans, who were great,
   and wise, and powerful nations. There were the Persians, who by their
   strength and policy subdued a great part of the world. There were the
   renowned nations of the Greeks and Romans, who were famed over the
   whole world for their excellent civil governments, for their wisdom and
   skill in the arts of peace and war, and who by their military prowess
   in their turns subdued and reigned over the world. Those were rejected.
   God did not choose them for his people, but left them for many ages
   under gross heathenish darkness, to perish for lack of vision; and
   chose one only people, the posterity of Jacob, to be his own people,
   and to give them the means of grace. Psal. 147:19,20. "He showeth his
   word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel. He hath
   not dealt so with any nation; and as for his judgments, they have not
   known them." This nation were a small, inconsiderable people in
   comparison with many other people. Deut. 7:7. "The Lord did not set his
   love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any
   people; for ye were the fewest of all people." So neither was it for
   their righteousness; for they had no more of that than other people.
   Deut. 9:6. "Understand therefore, that the Lord thy God giveth thee not
   this good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou art a
   stiff-necked people." God gives them to understand, that it was from no
   other cause but his free electing love, that he chose them to be his
   people. That reason is given why God loved them; it was because he
   loved them. Deut. 7:8. Which is as much as to say, it was agreeable to
   his sovereign pleasure, to set his love upon you.

   God also showed his sovereignty in choosing that people, when other
   nations were rejected, who came of the same progenitors. Thus the
   children of Isaac were chosen, when the posterity of Ishmael and other
   sons of Abraham were rejected. So the children of Jacob were chosen,
   when the posterity of Esau were rejected: as the apostle observes in
   the seventh verse, "Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are
   they all children; but in Isaac shall thy seed be called:" and again in
   verses 10, 11, 12, 13. "And not only this; but when Rebekah also had
   conceived by one, even by our father Isaac; the children moreover being
   not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the promise of
   God according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that
   calleth; it was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger. As it
   is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated." The apostle has
   not respect merely to the election of the persons of Isaac and Jacob
   before Ishmael and Esau; but of their posterity. In the passage,
   already quoted from Malachi, God has respect to the nations, which were
   the posterity of Esau and Jacob; Mal. 1:2,3. "I have loved you, saith
   the Lord. Yet ye say, Wherein hast thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's
   brother? saith the Lord: yet I loved Jacob; and I hated Esau, and laid
   his mountains and his heritage waste for the dragons of the
   wilderness." God showed his sovereignty, when Christ came, in rejecting
   the Jews, and calling the Gentiles. God rejected that nation who were
   the children of Abraham according to the flesh, and had been his
   peculiar people for so many ages, and who alone possessed the one true
   God, and chose idolatrous heathen before them, and called them to be
   his people. When the Messiah came, who was born of their nation, and
   whom they so much expected, he rejected them. He came to his own, and
   his own received him not. John 1:11. When the glorious dispensation of
   the gospel came, God passed by the Jews, and called those who had been
   heathens, to enjoy the privileges of it. They were broken off, that the
   Gentiles might be graffed on. Rom. 11:17. She is now called beloved,
   that was not beloved. And more are the children of the desolate, than
   the children of the married wife. Isa. 54:1. The natural children of
   Abraham are rejected, and God raises up children to Abraham of stones.
   That nation, which was so honoured of God, have now been for many ages
   rejected, and remain dispersed all over the world, a remarkable
   monument of divine vengeance. And now God greatly distinguishes some
   Gentile nations from others, and all according to his sovereign
   pleasure.

   2. God exercises his sovereignty in the advantages he bestows upon
   particular persons. All need salvation alike, and all are, naturally,
   alike undeserving of it; but he gives some vastly greater advantages
   for salvation than others. To some he assigns their place in pious and
   religious families, where they may be well instructed and educated, and
   have religious parents to dedicate them to God, and put up many prayers
   for them. God places some under a more powerful ministry than others,
   and in places where there are more of the outpourings of the Spirit of
   God. To some he gives much more of the strivings and the awakening
   influences of the Spirit, than to others. It is according to his mere
   sovereign pleasure.

   3. God exercises his sovereignty in sometimes bestowing salvation upon
   the low and mean, and denying it to the wise and great. Christ in his
   sovereignty passes by the gates of princes and nobles, and enters some
   cottage and dwells there, and has communion with its obscure
   inhabitants. God in his sovereignty withheld salvation from the rich
   man, who fared sumptuously every day, and bestowed it on poor Lazarus,
   who sat begging at his gate. God in this way pours contempt on princes,
   and on all their glittering splendour. So God sometimes passes by wise
   men, men of great understanding, learned and great scholars, and
   bestows salvation on others of weak understanding, who only comprehend
   some of the plainer parts of Scripture, and the fundamental principles
   of the christian religion. Yea, there seem to be fewer great men
   called, than others. And God in ordering it thus manifests his
   sovereignty. 1 Cor. 1:26,27,28. "For ye see your calling, brethren, how
   that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
   noble, are called. But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world
   to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world
   to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world,
   and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which
   are not, to bring to nought things that are."

   4. In bestowing salvation on some who have had few advantages. God
   sometimes will bless weak means for producing astonishing effects, when
   more excellent means are not succeeded. God sometimes will withhold
   salvation from those who are the children of very pious parents, and
   bestow it on others, who have been brought up in wicked families. Thus
   we read of a good Abijah in the family of Jeroboam, and of a godly
   Hezekiah, the son of wicked Ahaz, and of a godly Josiah, the son of a
   wicked Amon. But on the contrary, of a wicked Amnon and Absalom, the
   sons of holy David, and that vile Manasseh, the son a good Hezekiah.
   Sometimes some, who have had eminent means of grace, are rejected, and
   left to perish, and others, under far less advantages, are saved. Thus
   the scribes and Pharisees, who had so much light and knowledge of the
   Scriptures, were mostly rejected, and the poor ignorant publicans
   saved. The greater part of those, among whom Christ was much
   conversant, and who heard him preach, and saw him work miracles from
   day to day, were left; and the woman of Samaria was taken, and many
   other Samaritans at the same time, who only heard Christ preach, as he
   occasionally passed through their city. So the woman of Canaan was
   taken, who was not of the country of the Jews, and but once saw Jesus
   Christ. So the Jews, who had seen and heard Christ, and saw his
   miracles, and with whom the apostles laboured so much, were not saved.
   But the Gentiles, many of them, who, as it were, but transiently heard
   the glad tidings of salvation, embraced them, and were converted.

   5. God exercises his sovereignty in calling some to salvation, who have
   been very heinously wicked, and leaving others, who have been moral and
   religious persons. The Pharisees were a very strict sect among the
   Jews. Their religion was extraordinary. Luke 18:11. They were not as
   other men, extortioners, unjust, or adulterers. There was their
   morality. They fasted twice a week, and gave tithes of all that they
   possessed. There was their religion. But yet they were mostly rejected,
   and the publicans, and harlots, and openly vicious sort of people,
   entered into the kingdom of God before them. Matt. 21:31. The apostle
   describes his righteousness while a Pharisee. Philip. 3:6. "Touching
   the righteousness which is of the law, blameless." The rich young man,
   who came kneeling to Christ, saying, Good Master, what shall I do, that
   I may have eternal life, was a moral person. When Christ bade him keep
   the commandments, he said, and in his own view with sincerity, "All
   these have I kept from my youth up." He had obviously been brought up
   in a good family, and was a youth of such amiable manners and correct
   deportment, that it is said, "Jesus beholding him, loved him." Still he
   was left; while the thief, that was crucified with Christ, was chosen
   and called, even on the cross. God sometimes shows his sovereignty by
   showing mercy to the chief of sinners, on those who have been
   murderers, and profaners, and blasphemers. And even when they are old,
   some are called at the eleventh hour. God sometimes shows the
   sovereignty of his grace by showing mercy to some, who have spent most
   of their lives in the service of Satan, and have little left to spend
   in the service of God.

   6. In saving some of those who seek salvation, and not others. Some who
   seek salvation, as we know both from Scripture and observation, are
   soon converted; while others seek a long time, and do not obtain at
   last. God helps some over the mountains and difficulties which are in
   the way; he subdues Satan, and delivers them from his temptations: but
   others are ruined by the temptations with which they meet. Some are
   never thoroughly awakened; while to others God is pleased to give
   thorough convictions. Some are left to backsliding hearts; others God
   causes to hold out to the end. Some are brought off from a confidence
   in their own righteousness; others never get over that obstruction in
   their way, as long as they live. And some are converted and saved, who
   never had so great strivings as some who, notwithstanding, perish.

   IV. I come now to give the reasons, why God does thus exercise his
   sovereignty in the eternal salvation of the children of men.

   1. It is agreeable to God's design in the creation of the universe to
   exercise every attribute, and thus to manifest the glory of each of
   them. God's design in the creation was to glorify himself, or to make a
   discovery of the essential glory of his nature. It was fit that
   infinite glory should shine forth; and it was God's original design to
   make a manifestation of his glory, as it is. Not that it was his design
   to manifest all his glory to the apprehension of creatures; for it is
   impossible that the minds of creatures should comprehend it. But it was
   his design to make a true manifestation of his glory, such as should
   represent every attribute. If God glorified one attribute, and not
   another, such manifestation of his glory would be defective; and the
   representation would not be complete. If all God's attributes are not
   manifested, the glory of none of them is manifested as it is: for the
   divine attributes reflect glory on one another. Thus if God's wisdom be
   manifested, and not his holiness, the glory of his wisdom would not be
   manifested as it is; for one part of the glory of the attribute of
   divine wisdom is, that it is a holy wisdom. So if his holiness were
   manifested, and not his wisdom, the glory of his holiness would not be
   manifested as it is; for one thing which belongs to the glory of God's
   holiness is, that it is a wise holiness. So it is with respect to the
   attributes of mercy and justice. The glory of God's mercy does not
   appear as it is, unless it is manifested as a just mercy, or as a mercy
   consistent with justice. And so with respect to God's sovereignty, it
   reflects glory on all his other attributes. It is part of the glory of
   God's mercy, that it is sovereign mercy. So all the attributes of God
   reflect glory on one another. The glory of one attribute cannot be
   manifested, as it is, without the manifestation of another. One
   attribute is defective without another, and therefore the manifestation
   will be defective. Hence it was the will of God to manifest all his
   attributes. The declarative glory of God in Scripture is often called
   God's name, because it declares his nature. But if his name does not
   signify his nature as it is, or does not declare any attribute, it is
   not a true name. The sovereignty of God is one of his attributes, and a
   part of his glory. The glory of God eminently appears in his absolute
   sovereignty over all creatures, great and small. If the glory of a
   prince be his power and dominion, then the glory of God is his absolute
   sovereignty. Herein appear God's infinite greatness and highness above
   all creatures. Therefore it is the will of God to manifest his
   sovereignty. And his sovereignty, like his other attributes, is
   manifested in the exercises of it. He glorifies his power in the
   exercise of power. He glorifies his mercy in the exercise of mercy. So
   he glorifies his sovereignty in the exercise of sovereignty.

   2. The more excellent the creature is over whom God is sovereign, and
   the greater the matter in which he so appears, the more glorious is his
   sovereignty. The sovereignty of God in his being sovereign over men, is
   more glorious than in his being sovereign over the inferior creatures.
   And his sovereignty over angels is yet more glorious that his
   sovereignty over men. For the nobler the creature is, still the greater
   and higher doth God appear in his sovereignty over it. It is a greater
   honour to a man to have dominion over men, that over beasts; and a
   still greater honour to have dominion over princes, nobles, and kings,
   than over ordinary men. So the glory of God's sovereignty appears in
   that he is sovereign over the souls of men, who are so noble and
   excellent creatures. God therefore will exercise his sovereignty over
   them. And the further the dominion of any one extends over another, the
   greater will be the honour. If a man has dominion over another only in
   some instances, he is not therein so much exalted, as in having
   absolute dominion over his life, and fortune, and all he has. So God's
   sovereignty over men appears glorious, that it extends to every thing
   which concerns them. He may dispose of them with respect to all that
   concerns them, according to his own pleasure. His sovereignty appears
   glorious, that it reaches their most important affairs, even the
   eternal state and condition of the souls of men. Herein it appears that
   the sovereignty of God is without bounds or limits, in that it reaches
   to an affair of such infinite importance. God, therefore, as it is his
   design to manifest his own glory, will and does exercise his
   sovereignty towards men, over their souls and bodies, even in this most
   important matter of their eternal salvation. He has mercy on whom he
   will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens.

  APPLICATION.

   1. Hence we learn how absolutely we are dependent on God in this great
   matter of the eternal salvation of our souls. We are dependent not only
   on his wisdom to contrive a way to accomplish it, and on his power to
   bring it to pass, but we are dependent on his mere will and pleasure in
   the affair. We depend on the sovereign will of God for every thing
   belonging to it, from the foundation to the top-stone. It was of the
   sovereign pleasure of God, that he contrived a way to save any of
   mankind, and gave us Jesus Christ, his only-begotten Son, to be our
   Redeemer. Why did he look on us, and send us a Saviour, and not the
   fallen angels? It was from the sovereign pleasure of God. It was of his
   sovereign pleasure what means to appoint. His giving us the Bible, and
   the ordinances of religion, is of his sovereign grace. His giving those
   means to us rather than to others, his giving the awakening influences
   of his Spirit, and his bestowing saving grace, are all of his sovereign
   pleasure. When he says, "Let there be light in the soul of such an
   one," it is a word of infinite power and sovereign grace.

   2. Let us with the greatest humility adore the awful and absolute
   sovereignty of God. As we have just shown, it is an eminent attribute
   of the Divine Being, that he is sovereign over such excellent beings as
   the souls of men, and that in every respect, even in that of their
   eternal salvation. The infinite greatness of God, and his exaltation
   above us, appears in nothing more, than in his sovereignty. It is
   spoken of in Scripture as a great part of his glory. Deut. 32:39. "See
   now that I, even I, am he, and there is no God with me. I kill, and I
   make alive; I wound, and I heal; neither is there any that can deliver
   out of my hand." Psal. 115:3. "Our God is in the heavens; he hath done
   whatsoever he pleased." Daniel 4:34,35. "Whose dominion is an
   everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation.
   And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing; and he
   doeth according to his will in the armies of heaven, and among the
   inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him,
   What doest thou?" Our Lord Jesus Christ praised and glorified the
   Father for the exercise of his sovereignty in the salvation of men.
   Matt. 11:25,26. "I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
   because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast
   revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy
   sight." Let us therefore give God the glory of his sovereignty, as
   adoring him, whose sovereign will orders all things, beholding
   ourselves as nothing in comparison with him. Dominion and sovereignty
   require humble reverence and honour in the subject. The absolute,
   universal, and unlimited sovereignty of God requires, that we should
   adore him with all possible humility and reverence. It is impossible
   that we should go to excess in lowliness and reverence of that Being,
   who may dispose of us to all eternity, as he pleases.

   3. Those who are in a state of salvation are to attribute it to
   sovereign grace alone, and to give all the praise to him, who maketh
   them to differ from others. Godliness is no cause for glorying, except
   it be in God. 1 Cor. 1:29,30,31. "That no flesh should glory in his
   presence. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
   wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. That,
   according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the
   Lord." Such are not, by any means, in any degree to attribute their
   godliness, their safe and happy state and condition, to any natural
   difference between them and other men, or to any strength or
   righteousness of their own. They have no reason to exalt themselves in
   the least degree; but God is the being whom they should exalt. They
   should exalt God the Father, who chose them in Christ, who set his love
   upon them, and gave them salvation, before they were born, and even
   before the world was. If they inquire, why God set his love on them,
   and chose them rather than others, if they think they can see any cause
   out of God, they are greatly mistaken. They should exalt God the Son,
   who bore their names on his heart, when he came into the world, and
   hung on the cross, and in whom alone they have righteousness and
   strength. They should exalt God the Holy Ghost, who of sovereign grace
   has called them out of darkness into marvellous light; who has by his
   own immediate and free operation, led them into an understanding of the
   evil and danger of sin, and brought them off from their own
   righteousness, and opened their eyes to discover the glory of God, and
   the wonderful riches of God in Jesus Christ, and has sanctified them,
   and made them new creatures. When they hear of the wickedness of
   others, or look upon vicious persons, they should think how wicked they
   once were, and how much they provoked God, and how they deserved for
   ever to be left by him to perish in sin, and that it is only sovereign
   grace which has made the difference. 1 Cor. 6:10. Many sorts of sinners
   are there enumerated; fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, effeminate,
   abusers of themselves with mankind. And then in the eleventh verse, the
   apostle tells them, "Such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye
   are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus,
   and by the Spirit of our God." The people of God have the greater cause
   of thankfulness, more reason to love God, who hath bestowed such great
   and unspeakable mercy upon them of his mere sovereign pleasure.

   4. Hence we learn what cause we have to admire the grace of God, that
   he should condescend to become bound to us by covenant; that he, who is
   naturally supreme in his dominion over us, who is our absolute
   proprietor, and may do with us as he pleases, and is under no
   obligation to us; that he should, as it were, relinquish his absolute
   freedom, and should cease to be merely sovereign in his dispensations
   towards believers, when once they have believed in Christ, and should,
   for their more abundant consolation, become bound. So that they can
   challenge salvation of this Sovereign; they can demand it through
   Christ, as a debt. And it would be prejudicial to the glory of God's
   attributes, to deny it to them; it would be contrary to his justice and
   faithfulness. What wonderful condescension is it in such a Being, thus
   to become bound to us, worms of the dust, for our consolation! He bound
   himself by his word, his promise. But he was not satisfied with that;
   but that we might have stronger consolation still, he hath bound
   himself by his oath. Heb. 6:13, etc. "For when God made promise to
   Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he sware by himself;
   saying, Surely blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will
   multiply thee. And so, after he had patiently endured, he obtained the
   promise. For men verily swear by the greater; and an oath for
   confirmation is to them an end of all strife. Wherein God, willing more
   abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his
   counsel, confirmed it by an oath; that by two immutable things, in
   which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong
   consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
   before us. Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and
   stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil; whither the
   forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever
   after the order of Melchisedec."

   Let us, therefore, labour to submit to the sovereignty of God. God
   insists, that his sovereignty be acknowledged by us, and that even in
   this great matter, a matter which so nearly and infinitely concerns us,
   as our own eternal salvation. This is the stumbling-block on which
   thousands fall and perish; and if we go on contending with God about
   his sovereignty, it will be our eternal ruin. It is absolutely
   necessary that we should submit to God, as our absolute sovereign, and
   the sovereign over our souls; as one who may have mercy on whom he will
   have mercy, and harden whom he will.

   5. And lastly. We may make use of this doctrine to guard those who seek
   salvation from two opposite extremes - presumption and discouragement.
   Do not presume upon the mercy of God, and so encourage yourself in sin.
   Many hear that God's mercy is infinite, and therefore think, that if
   they delay seeking salvation for the present, and seek it hereafter,
   that God will bestow his grace upon them. But consider, that though
   God's grace is sufficient, yet he is sovereign, and will use his own
   pleasure whether he will save you or not. If you put off salvation till
   hereafter, salvation will not be in your power. It will be as a
   sovereign God pleases, whether you shall obtain it or not. Seeing,
   therefore, that in this affair you are so absolutely dependent on God,
   it is best to follow his direction in seeking it, which is to hear his
   voice to-day: "To-day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
   heart." Beware also of discouragement. Take heed of despairing
   thoughts, because you are a great sinner, because you have persevered
   so long in sin, have backslidden, and resisted the Holy Ghost. Remember
   that, let your case be what it may, and you ever so great a sinner, if
   you have not committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, God can bestow
   mercy upon you without the least prejudice to the honour of his
   holiness, which you have offended, or to the honour of his majesty,
   which you have insulted, or of his justice, which you have made your
   enemy, or of his truth, or of any of his attributes. Let you be what
   sinner you may, God can, if he pleases, greatly glorify himself in your
   salvation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] click on a Roman Numeral to jump to that passage
     __________________________________________________________________

                       GOD GLORIFIED IN MAN'S DEPENDENCE

   Advertisement to the Reader

   Sermon
     __________________________________________________________________

                       GOD GLORIFIED IN MAN'S DEPENDENCE

  ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER,
  RESPECTING THE FIRST SERMON.

   IT was with no small difficulty that the author's youth and modesty
   were prevailed on to let him appear a preacher in our public lecture,
   and afterwards to give us a copy of his discourse, at the desire of
   divers ministers and others who heard it. But as we quickly found him a
   workman that needs not to be ashamed before his brethren, our
   satisfaction was the greater to see him pitching upon so noble a
   subject, and treating it with so much strength and clearness, as the
   judicious reader will perceive in the following composure: a subject
   which secures to God his great design in the work of fallen man's
   redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ, which is evidently so laid out, as
   that the glory of the whole should return to him, the blessed ordainer,
   purchaser, and applier; a subject which enters deep into practical
   religion; without the belief of which, that must soon die in the hearts
   and lives of men.

   For in proportion to the sense we have of our dependence on the
   sovereign God for all the good we want, will be our value for him, our
   trust in him, our fear to offend him, and our care to please him; as
   likewise our gratitude and love, our delight and praise, upon our
   sensible experience of his free benefits.

   In short, it is the very soul of piety, to apprehend and own that all
   our springs are in him; the springs of our present grace and comfort,
   and of our future glory and blessedness; and that they all entirely
   flow through Christ, by the efficacious influence of the Holy Spirit.
   By these things saints live, and in all these things is the life of our
   spirits.

   Such doctrines as these, which, by humbling the minds of men, prepare
   them for the exaltations of God, he has signally owned and prospered in
   the reformed world, and in our land especially, in the days of our
   forefathers; and we hope they will never grow unfashionable among us;
   for, we are well assured, if those which we call the doctrines of grace
   ever come to be contemned or disrelished, vital piety will
   proportionably languish and wear away; as these doctrines always sink
   in the esteem of men upon the decay of serious religion.

   We cannot therefore but express our joy and thankfulness, that the
   great Head of the church is pleased still to raise up from among the
   children of his people, for the supply of his churches, those who
   assert and maintain these evangelical principles; and that our churches
   (notwithstanding all their degeneracies) have still a high value for
   such principles, and for those who publicly own and teach them.

   And as we cannot but wish and pray that the college in the neighbouring
   colony (as well as our own) may be a fruitful mother of many such sons
   as the author, by the blessing of Heaven on the care of their present
   worthy rector; so we heartily rejoice in the special favour of
   Providence in bestowing such a rich gift on the happy church of
   Northampton, which has for so many lustres of years flourished under
   the influence of such pious doctrines, taught them in the excellent
   ministry of their late venerable pastor, whose gift and spirit, we
   hope, will long live and shine in this his grandson,to the end that
   they may abound yet more in all the lovely fruits of evangelical
   humility and thankfulness, to the glory of God.

   To his blessing we commit them all, with this discourse, and every one
   that reads it; and are Your servants in the gospel,

    T. PRINCE.
    W. COOPER.

   Boston, August 17, 1731.
     __________________________________________________________________

GOD GLORIFIED IN MAN'S DEPENDENCE

A Sermon

  by

Jonathan Edwards

      [Preached on the Public Lecture in Boston, July 8, 1731; and published at
      the desire of several ministers and others in Boston who heard it. -- This
      was the first piece published by Mr. Edwards.]

  1 Corinthians 1:29, 30, 31 -- That no flesh should glory in his presence. But
  of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
  righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: that, according as it is
  written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.

   THOSE Christians to whom the apostle directed this epistle, dwelt in a
   part of the world where human wisdom was in great repute; as the
   apostle observes in the 22nd verse of this chapter, "The Greeks seek
   after wisdom." Corinth was not far from Athens, that had been for many
   ages the most famous seat of philosophy and learning in the world. The
   apostle therefore observes to them, how God by the gospel destroyed,
   and brought to nought, their wisdom. The learned Grecians, and their
   great philosophers, by all their wisdom did not know God, they were not
   able to find out the truth in divine things. But, after they had done
   their utmost to no effect, it pleased God at length to reveal himself
   by the gospel, which they accounted foolishness. He " chose the foolish
   things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak things of the
   world to confound the things which are mighty, and the base things of
   the world, and things that are despised, yea, and things which are not,
   to bring to nought the things that are." And the apostle informs them
   in the text why he thus did, That no flesh should glory in his
   presence, etc.- In which words may be observed,

   1. What God aims at in the disposition of things in the affair of
   redemption, viz. that man should not glory in himself, but alone in
   God; That no flesh should glory in his presence, --that, according as
   it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.

   2. How this end is attained in the work of redemption, viz. by that
   absolute and immediate dependence which men have upon God in that work,
   for all their good. Inasmuch as,

   First, All the good that they have is in and through Christ; He is made
   unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. All the
   good of the fallen and redeemed creature is concerned in these four
   things, and cannot be better distributed than into them; but Christ is
   each of them to us, and we have none of them any otherwise than in him.
   He is made of God unto us wisdom: in him are all the proper good and
   true excellency of the understanding. Wisdom was a thing that the
   Greeks admired; but Christ is the true light of the world; it is
   through him alone that true wisdom is imparted to the mind. It is in
   and by Christ that we have righteousness: it is by being in him that we
   are justified, have our sins pardoned, and are received as righteous
   into God's favour. It is by Christ that we have sanctification: we have
   in him true excellency of heart as well as of understanding; and he is
   made unto us inherent as well as imputed righteousness. It is by Christ
   that we have redemption, or the actual deliverance from all misery, and
   the bestowment of all happiness and glory. Thus we have all our good by
   Christ, who is God.

   Secondly, Another instance wherein our dependence on God for all our
   good appears, is this, That it is God that has given us Christ, that we
   might have these benefits through him; he of God is made unto us
   wisdom, righteousness, etc.

   Thirdly, It is of him that we are in Christ Jesus, and come to have an
   interest in him, and so do receive those blessings which he is made
   unto us. It is God that gives us faith whereby we close with Christ.

   So that in this verse is shown our dependence on each person in the
   Trinity for all our good. We are dependent on Christ the Son of God, as
   he is our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. We are
   dependent on the Father, who has given us Christ, and made him to be
   these things to us. We are dependent on the Holy Ghost, for it is of
   him that we are in Christ Jesus; it is the Spirit of God that gives
   faith in him, whereby we receive him,and close with him.

  DOCTRINE.

   "God is glorified in the work of redemption in this, that there appears
   in it so absolute and universal a dependence of the redeemed on him."
   -- Here I propose to show, 1st, That there is an absolute and universal
   dependence of the redeemed on God for all their good. And, 2dly, That
   God hereby is exalted and glorified in the work of redemption.

   I. There is an absolute and universal dependence of the redeemed on
   God. The nature and contrivance of our redemption is such, that the
   redeemed are in every thing directly, immediately, and entirely
   dependent on God: they are dependent on him for all, and are dependent
   on him every way.

   The several ways wherein the dependence of one being may be upon
   another for its good, and wherein the redeemed of Jesus Christ depend
   on God for all their good, are these, viz. That they have all their
   good of him, and that they have all through him, and that they have all
   in him: That he is the cause and original whence all their good comes,
   therein it is of him; and that he is the medium by which it is obtained
   and conveyed, therein they have it through him; and that he is the good
   itself given and conveyed, therein it is in him. Now those that are
   redeemed by Jesus Christ do, in all these respects, very directly and
   entirely depend on God for their all.

   First, The redeemed have all their good of God. God is the great author
   of it. He is the first cause of it; and not only so, but he is the only
   proper cause. It is of God that we have our Redeemer. It is God that
   has provided a Saviour for us. Jesus Christ is not only of God in his
   person, as he is the only-begotten Son of God, but he is from God, as
   we are concerned in him, and in his office of Mediator. He is the gift
   of God to us: God chose and anointed him, appointed him his work, and
   sent him into the world. And as it is God that gives, so it is God that
   accepts the Saviour. He gives the purchaser, and he affords the thing
   purchased.

   It is of God that Christ becomes ours, that we are brought to him, and
   are united to him. It is of God that we receive faith to close with
   him, that we may have an interest in him. Eph. 2:8. "For by grace ye
   are saved, through faith; and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of
   God." It is of God that we actually receive all the benefits that
   Christ has purchased. It is God that pardons and justifies, and
   delivers from going down to hell; and into his favour the redeemed are
   received, when they are justified. So it is God that delivers from the
   dominion of sin, cleanses us from our filthiness, and changes us from
   our deformity. It is of God that the redeemed receive all their true
   excellency, wisdom, and holiness; and that two ways, viz. as the Holy
   Ghost by whom these things are immediately wrought is from God,
   proceeds from him, and is sent by him; and also as the Holy Ghost
   himself is God, by whose operation and indwelling the knowledge of God
   and divine things, a holy disposition and all grace, are conferred and
   upheld. And though means are made use of in conferring grace on men's
   souls, yet it is of God that we have these means of grace, and it is he
   that makes them effectual. It is of God that we have the Holy
   Scriptures; they are his word. It is of God that we have ordinances,
   and their efficacy depends on the immediate influence of his Spirit.
   The ministers of the gospel are sent of God, and all their sufficiency
   is of him.-- 2 Cor. 4:7. "We have this treasure in earthen vessels,
   that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us." Their
   success depends entirely and absolutely on the immediate blessing and
   influence of God.

   1. The redeemed have all from the grace of God. It was of mere grace
   that God gave us his only-begotten Son. The grace is great in
   proportion to the excellency of what is given. The gift was infinitely
   precious, because it was of a person infinitely worthy, a person of
   infinite glory; and also because it was of a person infinitely near and
   dear to God. The grace is great in proportion to the benefit we have
   given us in him. The benefit is doubly infinite, in that in him we have
   deliverance from an infinite, because an eternal, misery, and do also
   receive eternal joy and glory. The grace in bestowing this gift is
   great in proportion to our unworthiness to whom it is given; instead of
   deserving such a gift, we merited infinitely ill of God's hands. The
   grace is great according to the manner of giving, or in proportion to
   the humiliation and expense of the method and means by which a way is
   made for our having the gift. He gave him to dwell amongst us; he gave
   him to us incarnate, or in our nature; and in the like though sinless
   infirmities. He gave him to us in a low and afflicted state; and not
   only so, but as slain, that he might be a feast for our souls.

   The grace of God in bestowing this gift is most free. It was what God
   was under no obligation to bestow. He might have rejected fallen man,
   as he did the fallen angels. It was what we never did any thing to
   merit; it was given while we were yet enemies, and before we had so
   much as repented. It was from the love of God who saw no excellency in
   us to attract it; and it was without expectation of ever being requited
   for it. And it is from mere grace that the benefits of Christ are
   applied to such and such particular persons. Those that are called and
   sanctified are to attribute it alone to the good pleasure of God's
   goodness, by which they are distinguished. He is sovereign, and hath
   mercy on whom he will have mercy.

   Man hath now a greater dependence on the grace of God than he had
   before the fall. He depends on the free goodness of God for much more
   than he did then. Then he depended on God's goodness for conferring the
   reward of perfect obedience; for God was not obliged to promise and
   bestow that reward. But now we are dependent on the grace of God for
   much more; we stand in need of grace, not only to bestow glory upon us,
   but to deliver us from hell and eternal wrath. Under the first covenant
   we depended on God's goodness to give us the reward of righteousness;
   and so we do now; but we stand in need of God's free and sovereign
   grace to give us that righteousness; to pardon our sin, and release us
   from the guilt and infinite demerit of it.

   And as we are dependent on the goodness of God for more now than under
   the first covenant, so we are dependent on a much greater, more free
   and wonderful goodness. We are now more dependent on God's arbitrary
   and sovereign good pleasure. We were in our first estate dependent on
   God for holiness. We had our original righteousness from him; but then
   holiness was not bestowed in such a way of sovereign good pleasure as
   it is now. Man was created holy, for it became God to create holy all
   his reasonable creatures. It would have been a disparagement to the
   holiness of God's nature, if he had made an intelligent creature
   unholy. But now when fallen man is made holy, it is from mere and
   arbitrary grace; God may for ever deny holiness to the fallen creature
   if he pleases, without any disparagement to any of his perfections.

   And we are not only indeed more dependent on the grace of God, but our
   dependence is much more conspicuous, because our own insufficiency and
   helplessness in ourselves is much more apparent in our fallen and
   undone state, than it was before we were either sinful or miserable. We
   are more apparently dependent on God for holiness, because we are first
   sinful,and utterly polluted,and afterward holy. So the production of
   the effect is sensible, and its derivation from God more obvious. If
   man was ever holy and always was so,it would not be so apparent, that
   he had not holiness necessarily,as an inseparable qualification of
   human nature. So we are more apparently dependent on free grace for the
   favour of God, for we are first justly the objects of his displeasure,
   and afterwards are received into favour. We are more apparently
   dependent on God for happiness, being first miserable, and afterwards
   happy. It is more apparently free and without merit in us, because we
   are actually without any kind of excellency to merit, if there could be
   any such thing as merit in creature excellency. And we are not only
   without any true excellency, but are full of, and wholly defiled with,
   that which is infinitely odious. All our good is more apparently from
   God, because we are first naked and wholly with- out any good, and
   afterwards enriched with all good.

   2. We receive all from the power of God. Man's redemption is often
   spoken of as a work of wonderful power as well as grace. The great
   power of God appears in bringing a sinner from his low state, from the
   depths of sin and misery, to such an exalted state of holiness and
   happiness. Eph. 1:19. "And what is the exceeding greatness of his power
   to us- ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty
   power."----

   We are dependent on God's power through every step of our redemption.
   We are dependent on the power of God to convert us, and give faith in
   Jesus Christ, and the new nature. It is a work of creation: "If any man
   be in Christ, he is a new creature," 2 Cor. 5:17. "We are created in
   Christ Jesus," Eph. 2:10. The fallen creature cannot attain to true
   holiness, but by being created again. Eph. 4:24. "And that ye put on
   the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
   holiness." It is a raising from the dead. Colos. 2:12-13. "Wherein also
   ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who
   hath raised him from the dead." Yea, it is a more glorious work of
   power than mere creation, or raising a dead body to life, in that the
   effect attained is greater and more excellent. That holy and happy
   being, and spiritual life, which is produced in the work of conversion,
   is a far greater and more glorious effect, than mere being and life.
   And the state from whence the change is made -- a death in sin, a total
   corruption of nature, and depth of misery -- is far more remote from
   the state attained, than mere death or non-entity.

   It is by God's power also that we are preserved in a state of grace. 1
   Pet. 1:5. "Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto
   salvation." As grace is at first from God, so it is continually from
   him, and is maintained by him, as much as light in the atmosphere is
   all day long from the sun, as well as at first dawning, or sun-rising.
   -- Men are dependent on the power of God for every exercise of grace,
   and for carrying on that work in the heart, for subduing sin and
   corruption, increasing holy principles, and enabling to bring forth
   fruit in good works. Man is dependent on divine power in bringing grace
   to its perfection, m making the soul completely amiable in Christ's
   glorious likeness, and filling of it with a satisfying joy and
   blessedness; and for the raising of the body to life, and to such a
   perfect state, that it shall be suitable for a habitation and organ for
   a soul so perfected and blessed. These are the most glorious effects of
   the power of God, that are seen in the series of God's acts with
   respect to the creatures.

   Man was dependent on the power of God in his first estate, but he is
   more dependent on his power now; he needs God's power to do more things
   for him, and depends on a more wonderful exercise of his power. It was
   an effect of the power of God to make man holy at the first: but more
   remarkably so now, because there is a great deal of opposition and
   difficulty in the way. It is a more glorious effect of power to make
   that holy that was so depraved, and under the dominion of sin, than to
   confer holiness on that which before had nothing of the contrary. It is
   a more glorious work of power to rescue a soul out of the hands of the
   devil, and from the powers of darkness, and to bring it into a state of
   salvation, than to confer holiness where there was no prepossession or
   opposition. Luke 11:21-22. "When a strong man armed keepeth his palace,
   his goods are in peace; but when a stronger than he shall come upon
   him, and overcome him, he taketh from him all his armour, wherein he
   trusted, and divideth his spoils." So it is a more glorious work of
   power to uphold a soul in a state of grace and holiness, and to carry
   it on till it is brought to glory, when there is so much sin remaining
   in the heart resisting, and Satan with all his might opposing, than it
   would have been to have kept man from falling at first, when Satan had
   nothing in man.-- Thus we have shown how the redeemed are dependent on
   God for all their good, as they have all of him.

   Secondly, They are also dependent on God for all, as they have all
   through him. God is the medium of it, as well as the author and
   fountain of it. All we have, wisdom, the pardon of sin, deliverance
   from hell, acceptance into God's favour, grace and holiness, true
   comfort and happiness, eternal life and glory, is from God by a
   Mediator; and this Mediator is God; which Mediator we have an absolute
   dependence upon, as he through whom we receive all. So that here is
   another way wherein we have our dependence on God for all good. God not
   only gives us the Mediator, and accepts his mediation, and of his power
   and grace bestows the things purchased by the Mediator; but he the
   Mediator is God.

   Our blessings are what we have by purchase; and the purchase is made of
   God, the blessings are purchased of him, and God gives the purchaser;
   and not only so, but God is the purchaser. Yea God is both the
   purchaser and the price; for Christ, who is God, purchased these
   blessings for us, by offering up himself as the price of our salvation.
   He purchased eternal life by the sacrifice of himself. Heb. 7:27. "He
   offered up himself." And 9:26. "He hath appeared to take away sin by
   the sacrifice of himself." Indeed it was the human nature that was
   offered; but it was the same person with the divine, and therefore was
   an infinite price.

   As we thus have our good through God, we have a dependence on him in a
   respect that man in his first estate had not. Man was to have eternal
   life then through his own righteousness; so that he had partly a
   dependence upon what was in himself; for we have a dependence upon that
   through which we have our good, as well as that from which we have it;
   and though man's righteousness that he then depended on was indeed from
   God, yet it was his own, it was inherent in himself; so that his
   dependence was not so immediately on God. But now the righteousness
   that we are dependent on is not in ourselves, but in God. We are saved
   through the righteousness of Christ: He is made unto us righteousness;
   and therefore is prophesied of, Jer. 23:6, under that name, "the Lord
   our righteousness." In that the righteousness we are justified by is
   the righteousness of Christ, it is the righteousness of God. 2
   Cor.5:21. "That we might be made the righteousness of God in him."
   --Thus in redemption we have not only all things of God, but by and
   through him, 1 Cor. 8:6. "But to us there is but one God, the Father,
   of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by
   whom are all things, and we by him."

   Thirdly, The redeemed have all their good in God. We not only have it
   of him, and through him, but it consists in him; he is all our good.--
   The good of the redeemed is either objective or inherent. By their
   objective good, I mean that extrinsic object, in the possession and
   enjoyment of which they are happy. Their inherent good is that
   excellency or pleasure which is in the soul itself. With respect to
   both of which the redeemed have all their good in God, or which is the
   same thing, God him- self is all their good.

   1. The redeemed have all their objective good in God. God himself is
   the great good which they are brought to the posses- sion and enjoyment
   of by redemption. He is the highest good, and the sum of all that good
   which Christ purchased. God is the inheritance of the saints; he is the
   portion of their souls. God is their wealth and treasure, their food,
   their Life, their dwelling- place, their ornament and diadem, and their
   everlasting honour and glory. They have none in heaven but God; he is
   the great good which the redeemed are received to at death, and which
   they are to rise to at the end of the world. The Lord God is the light
   of the heavenly Jerusalem; and is the "river of the water of life "
   that runs, and "the tree of life that grows, in the midst of the
   paradise of God." The glorious excellencies and beauty of God will be
   what will for ever entertain the minds of the saints, and the love of
   God will be their everlasting feast. The redeemed will indeed enjoy
   other things; they will enjoy the angels, and will enjoy one another;
   but that which they shall enjoy in the angels, or each other, or in any
   thing else whatsoever that will yield them delight and happiness, will
   be what shall be seen of God in them.

   2. The redeemed have all their inherent good in God. Inherent good is
   twofold; it is either excellency or pleasure. These the redeemed not
   only derive from God, as caused by him, but have them in him. They have
   spiritual excellency and joy by a kind of participation of God. They
   are made excellent by a communication of God's excellency. God puts his
   own beauty, i.e. his beautiful likeness, upon their souls. They are
   made partakers of the divine nature, or moral image of God, 2 Pet. 1:4.
   They are holy by being made partakers of God's holiness. Heb. 12:10.
   The saints are beautiful and blessed by a communication of God's
   holiness and joy, as the moon and planets are bright by the sun's
   light. The saint hath spiritual joy and pleasure by a kind of effusion
   of God on the soul. In these things the redeemed have communion with
   God; that is, they partake with him and of him.

   The saints have both their spiritual excellency and blessedness by the
   gift of the Holy Ghost, and his dwelling in them. They are not only
   caused by the Holy Ghost, but are in him as their principle. The Holy
   Spirit becoming an inhabitant, is a vital principle in the soul. He,
   acting in, upon, and with the soul, becomes a fountain of true holiness
   and joy, as a spring is of water, by the exertion and diffusion of
   itself. John 4:14. "But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall
   give him, shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him,
   shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life."
   Compared with chap. 7:38-39. "He that believeth on me, as the Scripture
   hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water; but this
   spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive."
   The sum of what Christ has purchased for us, is that spring of water
   spoken of in the former of those places, and those rivers of living
   water spoken of in the latter. And the sum of the blessings, which the
   redeemed shall receive in heaven, is that river of water of life that
   proceeds from the throne of God and the Lamb, Rev. 22:1. Which
   doubtless signifies the same with those rivers of living water,
   explained, John 7:38-39, which is elsewhere called the "river of God's
   pleasures." Herein consists the fulness of good, which the saints
   receive of Christ. It is by partaking of the Holy Spirit, that they
   have communion with Christ in his fulness. God hath given the Spirit,
   not by measure unto him; and they do receive of his fulness, and grace
   for grace. This is the sum of the saints' inheritance; and there- fore
   that little of the Holy Ghost which believers have in this world, is
   said to be the earnest of their inheritance, 2 Cor. 1:22. "Who hath
   also sealed us, and given us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts."
   And chap. 5:5. "Now he that hath wrought us for the self-same thing, is
   God, who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit." And Eph.
   1:13-14. "Ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which is the
   earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
   possession."

   The Holy Spirit and good things are spoken of in Scripture as the same;
   as if the Spirit of God communicated to the soul, comprised all good
   things, Matt. 7:11. "How much more shall your heavenly Father give good
   things to them that ask him?" In Luke it is, chap. 11:13. "How much
   more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask
   him?" This is the sum of the blessings that Christ died to procure, and
   the subject of gospel-promises. Gal. 3:13-14. "He was made a curse for
   us, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith." The
   Spirit of God is the great promise of the Father, Luke 24:49. "Behold,
   I send the promise of my Father upon you." The Spirit of God therefore
   is called "the Spirit of promise," Eph. 1:33. This promised thing
   Christ received, and had given into his hand, as soon as he had
   finished the work of our redemption, to bestow on all that he had
   redeemed; Acts 2:13. "Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted,
   and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he
   hath shed forth this, which ye both see and hear." So that all the
   holiness and happiness of the redeemed is in God. It is in the
   communications, indwelling, and acting of the Spirit of God. Holiness
   and happiness is in the fruit, here and hereafter, because God dwells
   in them, and they in God.

   Thus God has given us the Redeemer, and it is by him that our good is
   purchased. So God is the Redeemer and the price; and he also is the
   good purchased. So that all that we have is of God, and through him,
   and in him. Rom. 11:36. "For of him, and through him, and to him, or in
   him, are all things." The same in the Greek that is here rendered to
   him, is rendered in him, 1 Cor. 8:6.

   II. God is glorified in the work of redemption by this means, viz. By
   there being so great and universal a dependence of the redeemed on him.

   1. Man hath so much the greater occasion and obligation to notice and
   acknowledge God's perfections and all-sufficiency. The greater the
   creature's dependence is on God's perfections, and the greater concern
   he has with them, so much the greater occasion has he to take notice of
   them. So much the greater concern any one has with and dependence upon
   the power and grace of God, so much the greater occasion has he to take
   notice of that power and grace. So much the greater and more immediate
   dependence there is on the divine holiness, so much the greater
   occasion to take notice of and acknowledge that. So much the greater
   and more absolute dependence we have on the divine perfections, as
   belonging to the several persons of the Trinity, so much the greater
   occasion have we to observe and own the divine glory of each of them.
   That which we are most concerned with, is surely most in the way of our
   observation and notice; and this kind of concern with any thing, viz.
   dependence, does especially tend to command and oblige the attention
   and observation. Those things that we are not much dependent upon, it
   is easy to neglect; but we can scarce do any other than mind that which
   we have a great dependence on. By reason of our so great dependence on
   God, and his perfections, and in so many respects, he and his glory are
   the more directly set in our view, which way soever we turn our eyes.

   We have the greater occasion to take notice of God's all-sufficiency,
   when all our sufficiency is thus every way of him. We have the more
   occasion to contemplate him as an infinite good, and as the fountain of
   all good. Such a dependence on God demonstrates his all-sufficiency. So
   much as the dependence of the creature is on God, so much the greater
   does the creature's emptiness in himself appear; and so much the
   greater the creature's emptiness, so much the greater must the fulness
   of the Being be who supplies him. Our having all of God, shows the
   fulness of his power and grace; our having all through him, shows the
   fulness of his merit and worthiness; and our having all in him,
   demonstrates his fulness of beauty, love, and happiness. And the
   redeemed, by reason of the greatness of their dependence on God, have
   not only so much the greater occasion, but obligation to contemplate
   and acknowledge the glory and fulness of God. How unreasonable and
   ungrateful should we be, if we did not acknowledge that sufficiency and
   glory which we absolutely, immediately, and universally depend upon!

   2. Hereby is demonstrated how great God's glory is considered
   comparatively, or as compared with the creature's. By the creature
   being thus wholly and universally dependent on God, it appears that the
   creature is nothing, and that God is all. Hereby it appears that God is
   infinitely above us; that God's strength, and wisdom, and holiness, are
   infinitely greater than ours. However great and glorious the creature
   apprehends God to be, yet if he be not sensible of the difference
   between God and him, so as to see that God's glory is great, compared
   with his own, he will not be disposed to give God the glory due to his
   name. If the creature in any respects sets himself upon a level with
   God, or exalts himself to any competition with him, however he may
   apprehend that great honour and profound respect may belong to God from
   those that are at a greater distance, he will not be so sensible of its
   being due from him. So much the more men exalt themselves, so much the
   less will they surely be disposed to exalt God. It is certainly what
   God aims at in the disposition of things in redemption, (if we allow
   the Scriptures to be a revelation of God's mind,) that God should
   appear full, and man in himself empty, that God should appear all, and
   man nothing. It is God's declared design that others should not "glory
   in his presence;" which implies that it is his design to advance his
   own comparative glory. So much the more man "glories in God's
   presence," so much the less glory is ascribed to God.

   3. By its being thus ordered, that the creature should have so absolute
   and universal a dependence on God, provision is made that God should
   have our whole souls, and should be the object of our undivided
   respect. If we had our dependence partly on God, and partly on
   something else, man's respect would be divided to those different
   things on which he had dependence. Thus it would be if we depended on
   God only for a part of our good, and on ourselves, or some other being,
   for another part: or if we had our good only from God, and through
   another that was not God, and in something else distinct from both, our
   hearts would be divided between the good itself, and him from whom, and
   him through whom, we received it. But now there is no occasion for
   this, God being not only he from or of whom we have all good, but also
   through whom, and is that good itself, that we have from him and
   through him. So that whatsoever there is to attract our respect, the
   tendency is still directly towards God; all unites in him as the
   centre.

  USE.

   1. We may here observe the marvellous wisdom of God, in the work of
   redemption. God hath made man's emptiness and misery, his low, lost,
   and ruined state, into which he sunk by the fall, an occasion of the
   greater advancement of his own glory, as in other ways, so particularly
   in this, that there is now much more universal and apparent dependence
   of man on God. Though God be pleased to lift man out of that dismal
   abyss of sin and woe into which he was fallen, and exceedingly to exalt
   him in excellency and honour, and to a high pitch of glory and
   blessedness, yet the creature hath nothing in any respect to glory of;
   all the glory evidently belongs to God, all is in a mere, and most
   absolute, and divine dependence on the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And
   each person of the Trinity is equally glorified in this work: there is
   an absolute dependence of the creature on every one for all: all is of
   the Father, all through the Son, and all in the Holy Ghost. Thus God
   appears in the work of redemption as all in all. It is fit that he who
   is, and there is none else, should be the Alpha and Omega, the first
   and the last, the all and the only, in this work.

   2. Hence those doctrines and schemes of divinity that are in any
   respect opposite to such an absolute and universal dependence on God,
   derogate from his glory, and thwart the design of our redemption. And
   such are those schemes that put the creature in God's stead, in any of
   the mentioned respects, that exalt man into the place of either Father,
   Son, or Holy Ghost, in any thing pertaining to our redemption. However
   they may allow of a dependence of the redeemed on God, yet they deny a
   dependence that is so absolute and universal. They own an entire
   dependence of God for some things, but not for others; they own that we
   depend on God for the gift and acceptance of a Redeemer, but deny so
   absolute a dependence on him for the obtaining of an interest in the
   Redeemer. They own an absolute dependence on the Father for giving his
   Son, and on the Son for working out redemption, but not so entire a
   dependence on the Holy Ghost for conversion, and a being in Christ, and
   so coming to a title to his benefits. They own a dependence on God for
   means of grace, but not absolutely for the benefit and success of those
   means; a partial dependence on the power of God, for obtaining and
   exercising holiness, but not a mere dependence on the arbitrary and
   sovereign grace of God. They own a dependence on the free grace of God
   for a reception into his favour, so far that it is without any proper
   merit, but not as it is without being attracted, or moved with any
   excellency. They own a partial dependence on Christ, as he through whom
   we have life, as having purchased new terms of life, but still hold
   that the righteousness through which we have life is inherent in
   ourselves, as it was under the first covenant. Now whatever scheme is
   inconsistent with our entire dependence on God for all, and of having
   all of him, through him, and in him, it is repugnant to the design and
   tenor of the gospel, and robs it of that which God accounts its lustre
   and glory.

   3. Hence we may learn a reason why faith is that by which we come to
   have an interest in this redemption; for there is included in the
   nature of faith, a sensible acknowledgment of absolute dependence on
   God in this affair. It is very fit that it should be required of all,
   in order to their having the benefit of this redemption, that they
   should be sensible of, and acknowledge, their dependence on God for it.
   It is by this means that God hath contrived to glorify himself in
   redemption; and it is fit that he should at least have this glory of
   those that are the subjects of this redemption, and have the benefit of
   it.-- Faith is a sensibleness of what is real in the work of
   redemption; and the soul that believes doth entirely depend on God for
   all salvation, in its own sense and act. Faith abases men, and exalts
   God; it gives all the glory of redemption to him alone. It is necessary
   in order to saving faith, that man should be emptied of himself, be
   sensible that he is "wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
   naked." Humility is a great ingredient of true faith: he that truly
   receives redemption, receives it as a little child, Mark 10:15.
   "Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of heaven as a little child,
   he shall not enter therein." It is the delight of a believing soul to
   abase itself and exalt God alone: that is the language of it, Psalm
   115:1. "Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name give glory."

   4. Let us be exhorted to exalt God alone, and ascribe to him all the
   glory of redemption. Let us endeavour to obtain, and increase in, a
   sensibleness of our great dependence on God, to have our eye to him
   alone, to mortify a self-dependent and self-righteous disposition. Man
   is naturally exceeding prone to exalt himself, and depend on his own
   power or goodness; as though from himself he must expect happiness. He
   is prone to have respect to enjoyments alien from God and his Spirit,
   as those in which happiness is to be found.-- But this doctrine should
   teach us to exalt God alone; as by trust and reliance, so by praise.
   Let him that glorieth, glory in the Lord. Hath any man hope that he is
   converted, and sanctified, and that his mind is endowed with true
   excellency and spiritual beauty? that his sins are forgiven, and he
   received into God's favour, and exalted to the honour and blessedness
   of being his child, and an heir of eternal life? let him give God all
   the glory; who alone makes him to differ from the worst of men in this
   world, or the most miserable of the damned in hell. Hath any man much
   comfort and strong hope of eternal life, let not his hope lift him up,
   but dispose him the more to abase himself, to reflect on his own
   exceeding unworthiness of such a favour,and to exalt God alone. Is any
   man eminent in holiness, and abundant in good works, let him take
   nothing of the glory of it to himself, but ascribe it to him whose
   "workmanship we are, created in Christ Jesus unto good works."
     __________________________________________________________________

SERMON VI

TRUE SAINTS, WHEN ABSENT FROM THE BODY, ARE PRESENT WITH THE LORD [2]

  Jonathan Edwards

   2 Corinthians 5:8 -- We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be
   absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord.

   THE apostle in this place is giving a reason why he went on with so
   much boldness and immovable steadfastness, through such labors,
   sufferings, and dangers of his life, in the service of his Lord; for
   which his enemies, the false teachers among the Corinthians, sometimes
   reproached him as being beside himself, and driven on by a kind of
   madness. In the latter part of the preceding chapter, the apostle
   informs the Christian Corinthians, that the reason why he did thus,
   was, that he firmly believed the promises that Christ had made to his
   faithful servants of a glorious future eternal reward, and knew that
   these present afflictions were light, and but for a moment, in
   comparison of that far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. The
   same discourse is continued in this chapter; wherein the apostle
   further insists on the reason he had given of his constancy in
   suffering, and exposing himself to death in the work of the ministry,
   even the more happy state he expected after death. And this is the
   subject of the text; wherein may be observed,
    1. The great future privilege, which the apostle hoped for; that of
       being present with Christ. The words, in the original, properly
       signify dwelling with Christ, as in the same country or city, or
       making a home with Christ.
    2. When the apostle looked for this privilege, viz., when he should be
       absent from the body. Not to wait for it till the resurrection,
       when soul and body should be united again. He signifies the same
       thing in his epistle to the Philippians, chap. i. 22, 23: "But if I
       live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labor. Yet what I shall
       choose, I wot not. For I am in a strait between two; having a
       desire to depart, and to be with Christ."
    3. The value the apostle set on this privilege. It was such, that for
       the sake of it, he chose to be absent from the body. He was willing
       rather, or (as the word properly signifies) it were more pleasing
       to him, to part with the present life, and all its enjoyments, and
       be possessed of this great benefit, than to continue here.
    4. The present benefit, which the apostle had by his faith and hope of
       this future privilege, and of his great value for it, viz., that
       hence he received courage, assurance, and constancy of mind,
       agreeable to the proper import of the word that is rendered, we are
       confident. The apostle is now giving a reason of that fortitude and
       immovable stability of mind, with which he went through those
       extreme labors, hardships and dangers, which he mentions in this
       discourse; so that, in the midst of all, he did not faint, was not
       discouraged, but had constant light, and inward support, strength,
       and comfort in the midst of all: agreeable to the 10th verse of the
       foregoing chapter, "For which cause, we faint not; but though our
       outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day." And
       the same is expressed more particularly in the 8th, 9th, and 10th
       verses, of that chapter: "We are troubled on every side, yet not
       distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but
       not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing about in
       the body, the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus
       might be made manifest in our mortal flesh." And in the next
       chapter, verses 4- 10: "In all things approving ourselves as the
       ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities,
       in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors,
       in watchings, in fastings, by pureness, by knowledge, by
       long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned,
       by the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armor of
       righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by honor and
       dishonor, by evil report and good report: as deceivers, and yet
       true; as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold, we
       live; as chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet alway
       rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and
       yet possessing all things."

   Among the many useful observations there might be raised from the text,
   I shall at this time only insist on that which lies most plainly before
   us in the words, viz., this:

   The souls of true saints, when they leave their bodies at death, go to
   be with Christ.

   Departed souls of saints go to be with Christ, in the following
   respects:
    1. They go to dwell in the same blessed abode with the glorified human
       nature of Christ.
       The human nature of Christ is yet in being. He still continues, and
       will continue to all eternity, to be both God and man. His whole
       human nature remains: not only his human soul, but also his human
       body. His dead body rose from the dead; and the same that was
       raised from the dead, is exalted and glorified at God's right hand;
       that which was dead is now alive, and lives for evermore.
       And therefore there is a certain place, a particular part of the
       external creation, to which Christ is gone, and where he remains.
       And this place is that which we call the highest heaven, or the
       heaven of heavens; a place beyond all the visible heavens. Eph. iv.
       9, 10, "Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended
       first into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended, is the
       same also that ascended up far above all heavens." This is the same
       which the apostle calls the third heaven, 2 Cor. xii. 2, reckoning
       the aerial heaven as the first, the starry heaven as the second,
       and the highest heaven as the third. This is the abode of the holy
       angels; they are called "the angels of heaven," Matt. xxiv. 36;
       "The angels which are in heaven," Mark xiii. 32; "The angels of God
       in heaven," Matt. xxii. 30, and Mark xii. 25. They are said "always
       to behold the face of the Father which is in heaven," Matt. xviii,
       10. And they are elsewhere often represented as before the throne
       of God, or surrounding his throne in heaven, and sent from thence,
       and descending from thence on messages to this world. And thither
       it is that the souls of departed saints are conducted, when they
       die. They are not reserved in some abode distinct from the highest
       heaven; a place of rest, which they are kept in, till the day of
       judgment; such as some imagine, which they call the hades of the
       happy: but they go directly to heaven itself. This is the saints'
       home, being their Father's house: they are pilgrims and strangers
       on the earth, and this is the other and better country that they
       are travelling to, Heb. xi. 1326. This is the city they belong to:
       Philip. iii. 20, "Our conversation or (as the word properly
       signifies) citizenship, is in heaven." Therefore this undoubtedly
       is the place the apostle has respect to in my text, when he
       says,"We are willing to forsake our former house, the body, and to
       dwell in the same house, city or country, wherein Christ dwells;"
       which is the proper import of the words of the original. What can
       this house, or city, or country be, but that house, which is
       elsewhere spoken of, as their proper home, and their Father's
       house, and the city and country to which they properly belong, and
       whither they are travelling all the while they continue in this
       world, and the house, city, and country where we know the human
       nature of Christ is? This is the saints' rest; here their hearts
       are while they live; and here their treasure is. "The inheritance
       incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, that is
       designed for them, is reserved in heaven," 1 Pet. i. 4; and
       therefore they never can have their proper and full rest till they
       come here. So that undoubtedly their souls, when absent from their
       bodies (when the Scriptures represent them as in a state of perfect
       rest), arrive hither. Those two saints, that left this world, to go
       to their rest in another world, without dying, viz., Enoch and
       Elijah, went to heaven. Elijah was seen ascending up to heaven, as
       Christ was. And to the same resting place, is there all reason to
       think, that those saints go, that leave the world, to go to their
       rest, by death. Moses, when he died in the top of the mount,
       ascended to the same glorious abode with Elias, who ascended
       without dying. They are companions in another world; as they
       appeared together at Christ's transfiguration. They were together
       at that time with Christ in the mount, when there was a specimen or
       sample of his glorification in heaven. And doubtless they were also
       together afterwards, with him, when he was, actually, fully
       glorified in heaven. And thither undoubtedly it was, that the soul
       of Stephen ascended, when he expired. The circumstances of his
       death demonstrate it, as we have an account of it, Acts vii. 55,
       etc.: "He, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into
       heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right
       hand of God, and said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the
       Son of man (i.e. Jesus, in his human nature) standing on the right
       hand of God. Then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped
       their ears, and ran upon him with one accord, and cast him out of
       the city, and stoned him. And they stoned Stephen, calling upon
       God, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit." Before his death
       he had an extraordinary view of the glory that his Saviour had
       received in heaven, not only for himself, but for him, and all his
       faithful followers; that he might be encouraged, by the hopes of
       this glory, cheerfully to lay down his life for his sake.
       Accordingly he dies in the hope of this, saying, "Lord Jesus,
       receive my spirit." By which doubtless he meant, "receive my spirit
       to be with thee, in that glory, wherein I have now seen thee, in
       heaven, at the right hand of God." And thither it was that the soul
       of the penitent thief on the cross ascended. Christ said to him,
       "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise." Paradise is the same
       with the third heaven; as appears by 2 Cor. xii. 2, 3, 4. There
       that which is called the third heaven in the 2d verse, in the 4th
       verse is called paradise. The departed souls of the apostles and
       prophets are in heaven; as is manifest from Rev. xviii. 20:
       "Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets."
       The church of God is distinguished in Scripture, from time to time,
       into these two parts; that part of it that is in heaven, and that
       which is in earth; Eph. iii. 14, 15, "Jesus Christ, of whom the
       whole family in heaven and earth is named." Col. i. 20, "And having
       made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all
       things to himself, by him, I say, whether they be things in earth
       or things in heaven." Now what things in heaven are they for whom
       peace has been made by the blood of Christ's cross, and who have by
       him been reconciled to God, but the saints in heaven? In like
       manner we read, Eph. i. 10, of God's gathering together in one all
       things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth,
       even in him." The spirits of just men made perfect are in the same
       city of the living God, and heavenly Jerusalem, with the
       innumerable company of angels, and Jesus the Mediator of the new
       covenant; as is manifest by Heb. xii. 22, 23, 24. The church of God
       is often in Scripture called by the name Jerusalem; and the apostle
       speaks of the Jerusalem which is above, or which is in heaven, as
       the mother of us all; but if no part of the church be in heaven, or
       none but Enoch and Elias, it is not likely that the church would be
       called the Jerusalem which is in heaven.
    2. The souls of true saints, when they leave their bodies at death, go
       to be with Christ, as they go to dwell in the immediate, full and
       constant sight or view of him.
       When we are absent from our dear friends, they are out of sight;
       but when we are with them, we have the opportunity and satisfaction
       of seeing them. So while the saints are in the body, and are absent
       from the Lord, HE is in several respects out of sight: 1 Pet. i. 8,
       "Whom having not seen, ye love: in whom, though now ye see him not,
       yet believing," etc. They have indeed, in this world, a spiritual
       sight of Christ; but they see through a glass darkly, and with
       great interruption; but in heaven they see him face to face, 1 Cor.
       xiii. 12; "The pure in heart are blessed; for they shall see God,"
       Matt. v. 8. Their beatifical vision of God is in Christ, who is
       that brightness or effulgence of God's glory, by which his glory
       shines forth in heaven, to the view of saints and angels there, as
       well as here on earth. This is the Sun of righteousness, that is
       not only the light of this world, but is also the sun that
       enlightens the heavenly Jerusalem; by whose bright beams it is that
       the glory of God shines forth there, to the enlightening and making
       happy all the glorious inhabitants. "The Lamb is the light thereof;
       and so the glory of God doth lighten it," Rev. xxi. 23. None sees
       God the Father immediately, who is the King eternal, immortal,
       invisible; Christ is the image of that invisible God, by which he
       is seen by all elect creatures. The only begotten Son that is in
       the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him, and manifested him.
       None has ever immediately seen the Father, but the Son; and none
       else sees the Father any other way, than by the Son's revealing
       him. And in heaven, the spirits of just men made perfect do see him
       as he is. They behold his glory. They see the glory of his divine
       nature, consisting in all the glory of the Godhead, the beauty of
       all his perfections; his great majesty, almighty power, his
       infinite wisdom, holiness, and grace, and they see the beauty of
       his glorified human nature, and the glory which the Father hath
       given him, as God-man and Mediator. For this end, Christ desired
       that his saints might "be with him, that they might behold his
       glory," John xvii. 24. And when the souls of the saints leave their
       bodies, to go to be with Christ, they behold the marvellous glory
       of that great work of his, the work of redemption, and of the
       glorious way of salvation by him; desire to look into. They have a
       most clear view of the unfathomable depths of the manifold wisdom
       and knowledge of God; and the most bright displays of the infinite
       purity and holiness of God, that do appear in that way and work;
       and see in a much clearer manner than the saints do here, what is
       the breadth and length, and depth and height of the grace and love
       of Christ, appearing in his redemption. And as they see the
       unspeakable riches and glory of the attribute of God's grace, so
       they most clearly behold and understand Christ's eternal and
       unmeasurable dying love to them in particular. And in short, they
       see every thing in Christ that tends to kindle and inflame love,
       and every thing that tends to gratify love, and every thing that
       tends to satisfy them: and that in the most clear and glorious
       manner, without any darkness or delusion, without any impediment or
       interruption. Now the saints, while in the body, see something of
       Christ's glory and love; as we, in the dawning of the morning, see
       something of the reflected light of the sun mingled with darkness;
       but when separated from the body, they see their glorious and
       loving Redeemer, as we see the sun when risen, and showing his
       whole disk above the horizon, by his direct beams, in a clear
       hemisphere, and with perfect day.
    3. The souls of true saints, when absent from the body go to be with
       Jesus Christ, as they are brought into a most perfect conformity to
       and union with him. Their spiritual conformity is begun while they
       are in the hotly; here beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the
       Lord, they are changed into the same image; but when they come to
       see him as he is, in heaven, then they become like him in another
       manner. That perfect sight will abolish all remains of deformity,
       disagreement, and sinful unlikeness; as all darkness is abolished
       before the full blaze of the sun's meridian light: it is impossible
       that the least degree of obscurity should remain before such light;
       so it is impossible the least degree of sin and spiritual deformity
       should remain, in such a view of the spiritual beauty and glory of
       Christ, as the saints enjoy in heaven; when they see that Sun of
       righteousness without a cloud, they themselves shine forth as the
       sun, and shall be as little suns, without a spot. For then is come
       the time when Christ presents his saints to himself, in glorious
       beauty; "not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing;" and
       having holiness without a blemish. And then the saints' union with
       Christ is perfected. This also is begun in this world. The relative
       union is both begun and perfected at once, when the soul first
       closes with Christ by faith: the real union, consisting in the
       union of hearts and affections, and in the vital union, is begun in
       this world and perfected in the next. The union of the heart of a
       believer to Christ, is begun when his heart is drawn to Christ, by
       the first discovery of divine excellency, at conversion; and
       consequent on this drawing and closing of his heart with Christ, is
       established a vital union with Christ; whereby the believer becomes
       a living branch of the true vine, living by a communication of the
       sap and vital juice of the stock and root; and a member of Christ's
       mystical body, living by a communication of spiritual and vital
       influences from the head, and by a kind of participation of
       Christ's own life. But while the saints are in the body, there is
       much remaining distance between Christ and them: there are
       remainders of alienation, and the vital union is very imperfect;
       and so consequently is the communication of spiritual life and
       vital influences: there is much between Christ and believers to
       keep them asunder, much indwelling sin, much temptation, a world of
       carnal objects, to keep off the soul from Christ, and hinder a
       perfect coalescence.
       But when the soul leaves the body, all these clogs and hinderances
       shall be removed, every separating wall shall be broken down, and
       every impediment taken out of the way, and all distance shall
       cease; the heart shall be wholly and forever attached and bound to
       him, by a perfect view of his glory. And the vital union shall then
       be brought to perfection; the soul shall live perfectly in and upon
       Christ, being perfectly filled with his spirit, and animated by his
       vital influences; living, as it were, only by Christ's life,
       without any remainder of spiritual death, or carnal life.
    4. Departed souls of saints are with Christ, as they enjoy a glorious
       and immediate intercourse and converse with him.
       While we are present with our friends, we have opportunity for that
       free and immediate conversation with them, which we cannot have in
       absence from them. And therefore, by reason of the vastly more
       free, perfect, and immediate intercourse with Christ, which the
       saints enjoy when absent from the body, they are fitly represented
       as present with him.
       The most intimate intercourse becomes that relation that the saints
       stand in to Jesus Christ; and especially becomes that most perfect
       and glorious union they shall be brought into with him in heaven.
       They are not merely Christ's servants, but his friends, John xv.
       15. His brethren and companions, Psalm cxxii. 8; "yea, they are the
       spouse of Christ." They are espoused or betrothed to Christ while
       in the body; but when they go to heaven, they enter into the king's
       palace, their marriage with him is come, and the king brings them
       into his chambers indeed. They then go to dwell with Christ
       constantly, to enjoy the most perfect converse with him. Christ
       conversed in the most friendly manner with his disciples on earth;
       he admitted one of them to lean on his bosom: but they are admitted
       much more fully and freely to converse with him in heaven. Though
       Christ be there in a state of glorious exaltation, reigning in the
       majesty and glory of the sovereign Lord and God of heaven and
       earth, angels and men; yet this will not hinder intimacy and
       freedom of intercourse, but rather promote it. For he is thus
       exalted, not only for himself, but for them; he is instated in this
       glory of head over all things for their sakes, that they might be
       exalted and glorified; and when they go to heaven where he is, they
       are exalted and glorified with him; and shall not be kept at a more
       awful distance from Christ, but shall be admitted nearer, and to a
       greater intimacy. For they shall be unspeakably more fit for it,
       and Christ in more fit circumstances to bestow on them this
       blessedness. Their seeing the great glory of their friend and
       Redeemer, will not awe them to a distance, and make them afraid of
       a near approach; but on the contrary, will most powerfully draw
       them near, and encourage and engage them to holy freedom. For they
       will know that it is he that is their own Redeemer, and beloved
       friend and bridegroom; the very same that loved them with a dying
       love, and redeemed them to God by his blood; Matt. xiv. 27, "It is
       I; be not afraid." Rev. i. 17, 18," Fear not:--I am he that liveth,
       and was dead." And the nature of this glory of Christ that they
       shall see, will be such as will draw and encourage them; for they
       will not only see infinite majesty and greatness, but infinite
       grace, condescension, and mildness, and gentleness and sweetness,
       equal to his majesty. For he appears in heaven, not only as "the
       Lion of the tribe of Judah, but as the Lamb, and the Lamb in the
       midst of the throne, "Rev. v. 5, 6; and this Lamb in the midst of
       the throne shall be their shepherd, to" feed them, and lead them to
       living fountains of water," Rev. vii. 17; so that the sight of
       Christ's great kingly majesty will be no terror to them; but will
       only serve the more to heighten their pleasure and surprise. When
       Mary was about to embrace Christ, being full of joy at the sight of
       him again alive after his crucifixion, Christ forbids her to do it
       for the ended: John xx. 16, 17, "Jesus saith unto her, Mary. She
       turned herself, and saith unto him, Rabboni, which is to say,
       Master. Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not: for I am not yet
       ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I
       ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to my God and your
       God." As if he had said, "This is not the time and place for that
       freedom your love to me desires: this is appointed in heaven after
       my ascension. I am going thither; and you that are my true
       disciples, shall, as my brethren and companions, soon be there with
       me in my glory. And then there shall be no restraint. That is the
       place appointed for the most perfect expressions of complacence and
       endearment, and full enjoyment of mutual love." And accordingly the
       souls of departed saints with Christ in heaven, shall have Christ
       as it were unbosomed unto them, manifesting those infinite riches
       of love towards them, that have been there from eternity; and they
       shall be enabled to express their love to him, in an infinitely
       better manner than ever they could while in the body. Thus they
       shall eat and drink abundantly, and swim in the ocean of love, and
       be eternally swallowed up in the infinitely bright, and infinitely
       mild and sweet beams of divine love; eternally receiving that
       light, eternally full of it, and eternally compassed round with it,
       and everlastingly reflecting it back again to the fountain of it.
    5. The souls of the saints, when they leave their bodies at death, go
       to be with Christ, as they are received to a glorious fellowship
       with Christ in his blessedness.
       As the wife is received to a joint possession of her husband's
       estate, and as the wife of a prince partakes with him in his
       princely possessions and honors; so the church, the spouse of
       Christ, when the marriage comes, and she is received to dwell with
       him in heaven, shall partake with him in his glory. When Christ
       rose from the dead, and took possession of eternal life; this was
       not as a private person, but as the public head of all his redeemed
       people. He took possession of it for them, as well as for himself;
       and "they are quickened together with him, and raised up together."
       And so when he ascended into heaven, and was exalted to great glory
       there, this also was as a public person. He took possession of
       heaven, not only for himself, but his people, as their forerunner
       and head, that they might ascend also, "and sit together in
       heavenly places with him," Eph. ii. 5, 6. "Christ writes upon them
       his new name," Rev. iii. 12; i.e., he makes them partakers of his
       own glory and exaltation in heaven. His new name is that new honor
       and glory that the Father invested him with, when he set him on his
       own right hand. As a prince, when he advances any one to new
       dignity in his kingdom, gives him a new title. Christ and his
       saints shall be glorified together, Rom. viii. 17.
       The saints in heaven have communion, or a joint participation with
       Christ in his glory and blessedness in heaven, in the following
       respects more especially.

    1. They partake with him in the ineffable delights he has in heaven,
       in the enjoyment of his Father.
       When Christ ascended into heaven, he was received to a glorious and
       peculiar joy and blessedness in the enjoyment of his Father, who,
       in his passion, hid his face from him; such an enjoyment as became
       the relation he stood in to the Father, and such as was a meet
       reward for the great and hard service he had performed on earth.
       Then "God showed him the path of life, and brought him into his
       presence, where is fulness of joy, and to sit on his right hand,
       where there are pleasures for evermore," as is said of Christ,
       Psalm xvi. 11. Then the Father "made him most blessed forever. He
       made him exceeding glad with his countenance;" as in Psalm xxi. 6.
       The saints, by virtue of their union with Christ, and being his
       members, do, in some sort partake of his childlike relation to the
       Father; and so are heirs with him of his happiness in the enjoyment
       of his Father; as seems to be intimated by the apostle, in Gal. iv.
       4--7. The spouse of Christ, by virtue of her espousals to that only
       begotten Son of God, is, as it were, a partaker of his filial
       relation to God, and becomes the king's daughter, Psalm xiv. 13,
       and so partakes with her divine husband in his enjoyment of his
       Father and her Father, his God and her God." A promise of this
       seems to be implied in those words of Christ to Mary, John xx. 17.
       Thus Christ's faithful servants "enter into the joy of their Lord,"
       Matt. xxv. 21, 23, and "Christ's joy remains in them;" agreeably to
       those words of Christ, John xv. 11. Christ from eternity is, as it
       were, in the bosom of the Father, as the object of his infinite
       complacence. In him is the Father's eternal happiness. Before the
       world was, he was with the Father, in the enjoyment of his infinite
       love; and had infinite delight and blessedness in that enjoyment;
       as he declares of himself in Prov. viii. 30: "Then I was by him as
       one brought up with him. And I was daily his delight, rejoicing
       always before him." And when Christ ascended to the Father after
       his passion, he went to him, to the enjoyment of the same glory and
       blessedness in the enjoyment of his love; agreeably to his prayer
       the evening before his crucifixion, John xvii. 5: "And now, O
       Father, glorify me with thine own self, with the glory I had with
       thee before the world was." And in the same prayer, he manifests it
       to be his will, that his true disciples should be with him in the
       enjoyment of that joy and glory, which he then asked for himself,
       verse 13: "That my joy might be fulfilled in themselves:" verse 22,
       "And the glory which thou gavest me, I have given them." This glory
       of Christ, which the saints are to enjoy with him, is that which he
       has in the enjoyment of the Father's infinite love to him; as
       appears by the last words of that prayer of our Lord, verse 26:
       "That the love wherewith thou hast loved me, may be in them, and I
       in them." The love which the Father has to his Son is great indeed:
       the Deity does, as it were, wholly and entirely flow out in a
       stream of love to Christ; and the joy and pleasure of Christ is
       proportionably great. This is the stream of Christ's delights, the
       river of his infinite pleasure; which he will make his saints to
       drink of with him, agreeably to Psal. xxxvi. 8, 9: "They shall be
       abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house. Thou shalt make
       them drink of the river of thy pleasures. For with thee is the
       fountain of life. In thy light shall we see light." The saints
       shall have pleasure in partaking with Christ in his pleasure, and
       shall see light in his light. They shall partake with Christ of the
       same river of pleasure, shall drink of the same water of life, and
       of the same new wine in Christ's Father's kingdom, Matt. xxvi. 29.
       That new wine is especially that joy and happiness that Christ and
       his true disciples shall partake of together in glory, which is the
       purchase of Christ's blood, or the reward of his obedience unto
       death. Christ, at his ascension into heaven, received everlasting
       pleasures at his Father's right hand, and in the enjoyment of his
       Father's love, as the reward of his own death, or obedience unto
       death. But the same righteousness is reckoned to both head and
       members; and both shall have fellowship in the same reward, each
       according to their distinct capacity.
       That the saints in heaven have such a communion with Christ in his
       joy, and do so partake with him in his own enjoyment of the Father,
       does greatly manifest the transcendent excellency of their
       happiness, and their being admitted to a vastly higher privilege in
       glory than the angels.
    2. The saints in heaven are received to a fellowship or participation
       with Christ in the glory of that dominion to which the Father hath
       exalted him.
       The saints, when they ascend to heaven as Christ ascended, and are
       made to sit together with him in heavenly places, and are partakers
       of the glory of his exaltation, are exalted to reign with him. They
       are through him made kings and priests, and reign with him, and in
       him, over the same kingdom. As the Father hath appointed unto him a
       kingdom, so he has appointed to them. The Father has appointed the
       Son to reign over his own kingdom, and the Son appoints his saints
       to reign in his. The Father has given to Christ to sit with him on
       his throne, and Christ gives to the saints to sit with him on his
       throne, agreeably to Christ's promise, Rev. iii. 21. Christ, as
       God's Son, is the heir of his kingdom, and the saints are joint
       heirs with Christ: which implies, that they are heirs of the same
       inheritance, to possess the same kingdom, in and with him,
       according to their capacity. Christ, in his kingdom, reigns over
       heaven and earth; he is appointed the heir of all things; and so
       all things are the saints'; "whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas,
       or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to
       come," all are theirs; because they are Christ's, and united to
       him, 1 Cor. iii. 21, 22, 23. The angels are given to Christ as a
       part of his dominion: they are all given to wait upon him as
       ministering spirits to him. So also they are all, even the highest
       and most dignified of them, ministering spirits, to minister to
       them who are the heirs of salvation. They are Christ's angels, and
       they are also their angels. Such is the saints' union with Christ,
       and their interest in him, that what he possesses, they possess, in
       a much more perfect and blessed manner than if all things were
       given to them separately, and by themselves, to be disposed of
       according to their discretion. They are now disposed of so as, in
       every respect, to be most for their blessedness, by an infinitely
       better discretion than their own; and in being disposed of by their
       head and husband, between whom and them there is the most perfect
       union of hearts, and so the most perfect union of wills, and who
       are most perfectly each other's.
       As the glorified spouse of this great King reigns with and in him,
       in his dominion over the universe, so more especially does she
       partake with him in the joy and glory of his reign in his kingdom
       of grace; which is more peculiarly the kingdom that he possesses as
       Head of the church, and is that kingdom wherein she is more
       especially interested. It was especially to reign in this kingdom,
       that God the Father exalted him to his throne in heaven: he set his
       King on his holy hill of Zion, especially that he might reign over
       Zion, or over his church, in his kingdom of grace; and that he
       might be under the best advantages to carry on the designs of his
       love in this lower world. And therefore undoubtedly the saints in
       heaven are partakers with Christ in the joy and glory of the
       advancement and prosperity of his kingdom of grace on earth, and
       success of his gospel here, which he looks on as the peculiar glory
       of his reign.
       The good shepherd rejoices when he finds but one sheep that was
       lost; and his friends and neighbors in heaven rejoice with him on
       that occasion. That part of the family that is in heaven is surely
       not unacquainted with the affairs of that part of the same family
       that is on earth. They that are with the King and are next to him,
       the royal family, that dwell in his palace, are not kept in
       ignorance of the affairs of his kingdom. The saints in heaven are
       with the angels, the King's ministers, by which he manages the
       affairs of his kingdom, and who are continually ascending and
       descending from heaven to the earth, and one or other of them daily
       employed as ministering spirits to each individual member of the
       church below: besides the continual ascending of the souls of
       departed saints from all parts of the militant church. On these
       accounts the saints in heaven must needs be under a thousand times
       greater advantage than we here for a full view of the state of the
       church on earth, and a speedy, direct, and certain acquaintance
       with all its affairs in every part. And that which gives them much
       greater advantage for such an acquaintance than the things already
       mentioned, is their being constantly in the immediate presence of
       Christ, and in the enjoyment of the most perfect intercourse with
       him, who is the King who manages all these affairs, and has an
       absolutely perfect knowledge of them. Christ is the head of the
       whole glorified assembly; they are mystically his glorified body:
       and what the head sees, it sees for the information of the whole
       body, according to its capacity: and what the head enjoys, is for
       the joy of the whole body.
       The saints, in leaving this world, and ascending to heaven, do not
       go out of sight of things appertaining to Christ's kingdom on
       earth; but, on the contrary, they go out of a state of obscurity,
       and ascend above the mists and clouds into the clearest light: to a
       pinnacle in the very centre of light, where every thing appears in
       clear view. They have as much greater advantage to view the state
       of Christ's kingdom, and the works of the new creation here, than
       while they were in this world, as a man that ascends to the top of
       a high mountain has a greater advantage to view the face of the
       earth, than he had while he was in a deep valley, or thick forest
       below, surrounded on every side with those things that impeded and
       limited his sight. Nor do they view as indifferent or unconcerned
       spectators, any more than Christ himself is an unconcerned
       spectator.
       The happiness of the saints in heaven consists very much in
       beholding the glory of God appearing in the work of redemption: for
       it is by this chiefly that God manifests his glory, the glory of
       his wisdom, holiness, grace, and other perfections, to both saints
       and angels; as is apparent by many Scriptures. And therefore
       undoubtedly their happiness consists very much in beholding the
       progress of this work in its application and success, and the steps
       by which infinite power and wisdom bring it to its consummation.
       And the saints in heaven are under unspeakably greater advantage to
       take the pleasure of beholding the progress of this work on earth
       than we are that are here; as they are under greater advantages to
       see and understand the marvellous steps that Divine Wisdom takes in
       all that is done, and the glorious ends he obtains, the opposition
       Satan makes, and how he is baffled and overthrown. They can better
       see the connection of one event with another, and the beautiful
       order of all things that come to pass in the church in different
       ages that to us appear like confusion. Nor do they only view these
       things, and rejoice in them, as a glorious and beautiful sight, but
       as persons interested, as Christ is interested; as possessing these
       things in Christ, and reigning with him, in this kingdom. Christ's
       success in his work of redemption, in bringing home souls to
       himself, applying his saving benefits by his Spirit, and the
       advancement of the kingdom of grace in the world, is the reward
       especially promised to him by his Father in the covenant of
       redemption, for the hard and difficult service he performed while
       in the form of a servant; as is manifest by Isai. liii. 10, 11, 12.
       But the saints shall be rewarded with him: they shall partake with
       him in the joy of this reward; for this obedience that is thus
       rewarded is reckoned to them as they are his members, as was before
       observed. This was especially the joy that was set before Christ,
       for the sake of which he endured the cross and despised the shame.
       And his joy is the joy of all heaven. They that are with him in
       heaven are under much the greatest advantages to partake with him
       in this joy; for they have a perfect communion with him through
       whom, and in fellowship with whom, they enjoy and possess their
       whole inheritance, all their heavenly happiness; as much as the
       whole body has all its pleasure of music by the ear, and all the
       pleasure of its food by the mouth and stomach; and all the benefit
       and refreshment of the air by the lungs. The saints while on earth
       pray and labor for the same thing that Christ labored for, viz.,
       the advancement of the kingdom of God among men, the promoting of
       the prosperity of Zion, and flourishing of religion in this world;
       and most of them have suffered for that end as Christ did, have
       been made partakers with their head in his sufferings, and "filled
       up (as the apostle expresses it) that which is behind of the
       sufferings of Christ:" and therefore they shall partake with him of
       the glory and joy of the end obtained. Rom. viii. 17, "We are joint
       heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be
       also glorified together." 2 Tim. ii. 12, "If we suffer with him, we
       shall also reign with him." Christ, when his sufferings were past,
       and he left the earth and ascended into heaven, was so far from
       having done with kingdom in this world, that it was as it were but
       then begun: and he ascended for that very end, that he might more
       fully possess and enjoy this kingdom, that he might reign in it,
       and be under the best advantages for it; as much as a king ascends
       a throne in order to reign over his people, and receive the honor
       and glory of his dominion. No more have the saints done with
       Christ's kingdom on earth, when they leave the earth and ascend
       into heaven. "Christ came (i.e., ascended) with clouds of heaven,
       and came to the Ancient of days, and was brought near before him,
       to the very end, that he might receive dominion, and glory, and a
       kingdom, that all people, nations and languages, should serve him,"
       Dan. vii. 13, 14. Which shall be eminently fulfilled after the ruin
       of Antichrist, which is especially the time of Christ's kingdom.
       And the same is the time when "the kingdom and dominion, and
       greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to
       the people of the saints of the Most High God;" as verse 27, in the
       same chapter. It is because they shall reign in and with Christ,
       the Most High, as seems intimated in the words that follow; "whose
       kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve
       and obey him." This verse is true, not only of the saints on earth,
       but also the saints in heaven. Hence the saints in heaven, having
       respect to this time, do sing, in Rev. v. 10, "We shall reign on
       the earth." And agreeably hereto, it is afterwards represented,
       that when the forementioned time comes, the souls of them that in
       former ages had suffered with Christ do reign with Christ; having
       as it were given to them new life and joy, in that spiritual
       blessed resurrection, which shall then be of the church of God on
       earth; and thus it is that it is said, Matt. v. 5, "The meek (those
       that meekly and patiently suffer with Christ, and for his sake)
       shall inherit the earth:" they shall inherit it, and reign on earth
       with Christ. Christ is the heir of the world; and when the
       appointed time of his kingdom comes, his inheritance shall be given
       him, and then the meek, who are joint heirs, shall inherit the
       earth. The place in the Old Testament whence the words are taken,
       leads to a true interpretation of them. Psal. xxxvii. 11, "The meek
       shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the
       abundance of peace." That there is reference in these latter words,
       "the abundance of peace," to the peace and blessedness of the
       latter days, we may be satisfied by comparing these words with
       Psal. lxxii. 7," In his days shall be abundance of peace so long as
       the moon endureth:" and Jer. xxxiii. 6, "I will reveal to them the
       abundance of peace and truth:" also Isai. ii. 4, Micah iv. 3, Isai.
       xi. 6--9, and many other parallel places. The saints in heaven will
       be as much with Christ in reigning over the nations, and in the
       glory of his dominion at that time, as they will he with him in the
       honor of judging the world at the last day. That promise of Christ
       to his disciples, Matt. xix. 28, 29, seems to have a special
       respect to the former of these. In verse 28, Christ promises to the
       disciples, that hereafter, "when the Son of Man shall sit on the
       throne of his glory, they shall sit on twelve thrones, judging the
       twelve tribes of Israel." The saints in heaven reigning on earth in
       the glorious latter day, is described in language accommodated to
       this promise of Christ, Rev. xx. 4: "And I saw thrones, and they
       sat upon them; and judgment was given them. And they reigned with
       Christ." And the promise in the next verse, in that xixth of
       Matthew, seems to have its fulfillment at the same time: "And every
       one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or fathers,
       or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake shall receive a
       hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life;" i.e., in the
       time when the saints shall inherit the earth and reign on earth,
       the earth, with all its blessings and good things, shall be given
       in great abundance to the church, to be possessed by the saints.
       This shall they receive in this present world, and in the time to
       come everlasting life. The saints in heaven shall partake with
       Christ in the triumph and glory of those victories that he shall
       obtain in that future glorious time, over the kings and nations of
       the world, that are sometimes represented by his ruling them with a
       rod of iron, and dashing them in pieces as a potter's vessel. Which
       doubtless there is respect to in Rev. ii. 26, 27: "He that
       overcometh, and keepeth my words unto the end, to him will I give
       power over the nations: (and he shall rule them with a rod of iron;
       as the vessel of a potter shall they be broken to shivers:) even as
       I received of my Father." And Psal. cxlix. 5, to the end: "Let the
       saints be joyful in glory; let them sing aloud upon their beds;"
       i.e., in their separate state after death; compare Isai. lvii. 1,
       2. Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged
       sword in their hand: to execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and
       punishments upon the people; to bind their kings with chains, and
       their nobles with fetters of iron, to execute upon them the
       judgment written: this honor have all the saints." Accordingly when
       Christ appears riding forth to his victory over Antichrist, Rev.
       xix., the hosts of heaven appear going forth with him in robes of
       triumph, verse 14. And when Antichrist is destroyed, the
       inhabitants of heaven, and the holy apostles and prophets, are
       called upon to rejoice, chap. xviii. 20. And accordingly the whole
       multitude of the inhabitants of heaven, on that occasion, do appear
       to exult and praise God with exceeding joy, chap. xix. 18, and
       chap. xi. 15; and are also represented as greatly rejoicing on
       occasion of the ruin of the heathen empire, in the days of
       Constantine, chap xii. 10.
       And it is observable all along in the visions of that book, the
       hosts of heaven appear as much concerned and interested in the
       events appertaining to the kingdom of Christ here below, as the
       saints on earth. The day of the commencement of the church's latter
       day glory is eminently "the day of Christ's espousals; the day of
       the gladness of his heart, when as the bridegroom rejoiceth over
       the bride, so he will rejoice over his church." And then will all
       heaven exceedingly rejoice with him. And therefore they say at that
       time, Rev. xix. 7, "Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give glory to
       him; for the marriage of the Lamb is come."
       Thus Abraham enjoys these things when they come to pass, that were
       of old promised to him, and that he saw beforehand, and rejoiced
       in. He will enjoy the fulfilment of the promise of all the families
       of the earth being blessed in his seed, when it shall be
       accomplished. And all the ancient patriarchs, who died in faith of
       promises of glorious things that should be accomplished in this
       world, "who had not received the promises, but saw them afar off,
       and were persuaded of them, and embraced them," do actually enjoy
       them when fulfilled. David actually saw and enjoyed the fulfilment
       of that promise, in its due time, which was made to him many
       hundred years before, and was all his salvation and all his desire.
       Thus Daniel shall stand in his lot at the end of the days pointed
       out by his own prophecy. Thus the saints of old that died in faith,
       not having received the promises, are made perfect, and have their
       faith crowned by the better things accomplished in these latter
       days of the gospel, Heb. xi. 39, 40, which they see and enjoy in
       their time.
    3. The departed souls of saints have fellowship with Christ, in his
       blessed and eternal employment of glorifying the Father.
       The happiness of heaven consists not only in contemplation, and a
       mere passive enjoyment, but consists very much in action. And
       particularly in actively serving and glorifying God. This is
       expressly mentioned as a great part of the blessedness of the
       saints in their most perfect state, Rev. xxii. 3: "And there shall
       be no more curse; but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in
       it; and his servants shall serve him." The angels are as a flame of
       fire in their ardor and activity in God's service: the four
       animals, Rev. iv. (which are generally supposed to signify the
       angels), are represented as continually giving praise and glory to
       God, and are said not to rest day nor night, verse 8. The souls of
       departed saints are, doubtless, become as the angels of God in
       heaven in this respect. And Jesus Christ is the head of the whole
       glorious assembly; as in other things appertaining to their blessed
       state, so in this of their praising and glorifying the Father. When
       Christ, the night before he was crucified, prayed for his
       exaltation to glory, it was that he might glorify the Father: John
       xvii. 1, "These words spake Jesus, and lift up his eyes to heaven,
       and said, Father, the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son
       also may glorify thee." And this he doubtless does, now he is in
       heaven; not only in fulfilling the Father's will, in what he does
       as head of the church and ruler of the universe, but also in
       leading the heavenly assembly in their praises. When Christ
       instituted the Supper, and ate and drank with his disciples at his
       table (giving them therein a representation and pledge of their
       future feasting with him, and drinking new wine in his heavenly
       Father's kingdom), he at that time led them in their praises to
       God, in that hymn that they sang. And so doubtless he leads his
       glorified disciples in heaven. David was the sweet psalmist of
       Israel, and he led the great congregation of God's people in their
       songs of praise. Herein, as well as in innumerable other things, he
       was a type of Christ, who is often spoken of in Scripture by the
       name of David. And many of the psalms that David penned, were songs
       of praise, that he, by the spirit of prophecy, uttered in the name
       of Christ, as Head of the church, and leading the saints in their
       praises. Christ in heaven leads the glorious assembly in their
       praises to God, as Moses did the congregation of Israel at the Red
       Sea; which is implied in its being said, that "they sing the song
       of Moses and the Lamb," Rev. xv. 2, 3. In Rev. xix. 5, John tells
       us, that "he heard a voice come out of the throne, saying, Praise
       our God, all ye his servants, and ye that fear him, both small and
       great." Who can it be that utters this voice out of the throne, but
       the Lamb that is in the midst of the throne, calling on the
       glorious assembly of saints to praise his Father and their Father,
       his God and their God? And what the consequence of this voice is,
       we have an account in the next words: "And I heard as it were the
       voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as
       the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia; for the Lord God
       omnipotent reigneth."

  APPLICATION

   The use that I would make of what has been said on this subject is of
   exhortation. Let us all be exhorted hence earnestly to seek after that
   great privilege that has been spoken of, that when "we are absent from
   the body, we may be present with the Lord." We cannot continue always
   in these earthly tabernacles: they are very frail, and will soon decay
   and fall; and are continually liable to be overthrown by innumerable
   means: our souls must soon leave them, and go into the eternal world.
   O, how infinitely great will the privilege and happiness of such be,
   who at that time shall go to be with Christ in his glory, in the manner
   that has been represented! The privilege of the twelve disciples was
   great, in being so constantly with Christ as his family, in his state
   of humiliation. The privilege of those three disciples was great, who
   were with him in the mount of his transfiguration; where was exhibited
   to them some little semblance of his future glory in heaven, such as
   they might behold in the present frail, feeble, and sinful state: they
   were greatly entertained and delighted with what they saw; and were for
   making tabernacles to dwell there, and return no more down the mount.
   And great was the privilege of Moses when he was with Christ in Mount
   Sinai, and besought him to show him his glory, and he saw his back
   parts as he passed by, and proclaimed his name. But is not that
   privilege infinitely greater, that has now been spoken of, the
   privilege of being with Christ in heaven, where he sits on the right
   hand of God, in the glory of the King and God of angels, and of the
   whole universe, shining forth as the great light, the bright sun of
   that world of glory; there to dwell in the full, constant and
   everlasting view of his beauty and brightness; there most freely and
   intimately to converse with him, and fully to enjoy his love, as his
   friends and spouse; there to have fellowship with him in the infinite
   pleasure and joy he has in the enjoyment of his Father; there to sit
   with him on his throne, and reign with him in the possession of all
   things, and partake with him in the joy and glory of his victory over
   his enemies, and the advancement of his kingdom in the world, and to
   join with him in joyful songs of praise to his Father and their Father,
   to his God and their God, forever and ever? Is not such a privilege
   worth the seeking after?

   But here, as a special enforcement of this exhortation, I would improve
   that dispensation of God's holy providence, that is the sorrowful
   occasion of our coming together at this time, viz., the death of that
   eminent servant of Jesus Christ, in the work of the gospel ministry,
   whose funeral is this day to be attended; together with what was
   observable in him, living and dying.

   In this dispensation of Providence, God puts us in mind of our
   mortality, and forewarns us that the time is approaching when we must
   be absent from the body, and "must all appear (as the apostle observes
   in the next verse but one to my text) before the judgment seat of
   Christ, that every one of us may receive the things done in the body,
   according to what we have done, whether it be good or bad."

   And in him, whose death we are now called to consider and improve, we
   have not only an instance of mortality, but an instance of one that,
   being absent from the body, is present with the Lord; as we have all
   imaginable reason to conclude. And that, whether we consider the nature
   of the operations he was under, about the time whence he dates his
   conversion, or the nature and course of his inward exercises from that
   time forward, or his outward conversation and long space wherein he
   looked death in the face.

   His convictions of sin, preceding his first consolations in Christ (as
   appears by a written account he has left of his inward exercises and
   experiences), were exceeding deep and thorough: his trouble and
   exercise of mind, through a sense of guilt and misery, very great and
   long continued, but yet sound and solid; consisting in no unsteady,
   violent and unaccountable hurries and frights, and strange
   perturbations of mind; but arising from the most serious consideration,
   and proper illumination of the conscience to discern and consider the
   true state of things. And the light let into his mind at conversion,
   and the influences and exercises that his mind was subject to at that
   time, appear very agreeable to reason and the gospel of Jesus Christ;
   the change very great and remarkable, without any appearance of strong
   impressions on the imagination, sudden flights and pangs of the
   affections, and vehement emotions in animal nature; but attended with
   proper intellectual views of the supreme glory of the divine Being,
   consisting in the infinite dignity and beauty of the perfections of his
   nature, and of the transcendent excellency of the way of salvation by
   Christ. This was about eight years ago, when he was about twenty-one
   years of age.

   Thus God sanctified and made meet for his use, that vessel that he
   intended to make eminently a vessel of honor in his house, and which he
   had made of large capacity, having endowed him with very uncommon
   abilities and gifts of nature. He was a singular instance of a ready
   invention, natural eloquence, easy flowing expression, sprightly
   apprehension, quick discerning, and a very strong memory; and yet of a
   very penetrating genius, close and clear thought, and piercing
   judgment. He had an exact taste: his understanding was (if I may so
   express it) of a quick, strong and distinguishing scent.

   His learning was very considerable: he had a great taste for learning;
   and applied himself to his studies in so close a manner when he was at
   college, that he much injured his health; and was obliged on that
   account for a while to leave the college, throw by his studies and
   return home. He was esteemed one that excelled in learning in that
   society.

   He had an extraordinary knowledge of men, as well as things. Had a
   great insight into human nature, and excelled most that ever I knew in
   a communicative faculty: he had a peculiar talent at accommodating
   himself to the capacities, tempers and circumstances, of those that he
   would instruct or counsel.

   He had extraordinary gifts for the pulpit: I never had opportunity to
   hear him preach, but have often heard him pray: and I think his manner
   of addressing himself to God, and expressing himself before him, in
   that duty, almost inimitable; such (so far as I may judge) as I have
   very rarely known equalled. He expressed himself with that exact
   propriety and pertinency, in such significant, weighty, pungent
   expressions; with that decent appearance of sincerity, reverence, and
   solemnity, and great distance from all affectation, as forgetting the
   presence of men, and as being in the immediate presence of a great and
   holy God, that I have scarcely ever known paralleled. And his manner of
   preaching, by what I have often heard of it from good judges, was no
   less excellent; being clear and instructive, natural, nervous,
   forcible, and moving, and very searching and convincing. He nauseated
   an affected noisiness, and violent boisterousness in the pulpit; and
   yet much disrelished a flat, cold delivery, when the subject of
   discourse, and matter delivered, required affection and earnestness.

   Not only had he excellent talents for the study and the pulpit, but
   also for conversation. He was of a sociable disposition; and was
   remarkably free, entertaining, and profitable in ordinary discourse;
   and had much of a faculty of disputing, defending truth and confuting
   error.

   As he excelled in his judgment and knowledge of things in general, so
   especially in divinity. He was truly, for one of his standing, an
   extraordinary divine. But above all, in matters relating to
   experimental religion. In this, I know I have the concurring opinion of
   some that have had a name for persons of the best judgment. And
   according to what ability I have to judge things of this nature, and
   according to my opportunities, which of late have been very great, I
   never knew his equal, of his age and standing, for clear, accurate
   notions of the nature and essence of true religion, and its
   distinctions from its various false appearances; which I suppose to be
   owing to these three things meeting together in him;--the strength of
   his natural genius, and the great opportunities he had of observation
   of others, in various parts, both white people and Indians, and his own
   great experience.

   His experiences of the holy influences of God's Spirit were not only
   great at his first conversion, but they were so, in a continued course,
   from that time forward; as appears by a record, or private journal, he
   kept of his daily inward exercises, from the time of his conversion,
   until he was disabled by the failing of his strength, a few days before
   his death. The change which he looked upon as his conversion, was not
   only a great change of the present views, affections, and frame of his
   mind; but was evidently the beginning of that work of God on his heart,
   which God carried on, in a very wonderful manner, from that time to his
   dying day. He greatly abhorred the way of such, as live on their first
   work, as though they had now got through their work, and are thence
   forward, by degrees, settled in a cold, lifeless, negligent, worldly
   frame; he had an ill opinion of such persons' religion. [3]

   Oh that the things that were seen and heard in this extraordinary
   person, his holiness, heavenliness, labor and self- denial in life, his
   so remarkably devoting himself and his all, in heart and practice, to
   the glory of God, and the wonderful frame of mind manifested, in so
   steadfast a manner, under the expectation of death, and the pains and
   agonies that brought it on, may excite in us all, both ministers and
   people, a due sense of the greatness of the work we have to do in the
   world, the excellency and amiableness of thorough religion in
   experience and practice, and the blessedness of the end of such, whose
   death finishes such a life, and the infinite value of their eternal
   reward, when absent from the body and present with the Lord; and
   effectually stir us up to endeavors, that in the way of such a holy
   life we may at least come to so blessed an end. AMEN.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2] Preached on the day of the funeral of the Rev. Mr. David Brainerd,
   Missionary to the Indians, from the Honorable Society in Scotland for
   the propagation of Christian Knowledge, and Pastor of a Church of
   Christian Indians in New Jersey; who died at Northampton, in New
   England, October 9, 1747, in the 30th year of his age, and was interred
   on the l2th following.

   [3] We have omitted a few pages which follow here of this discourse,
   because what the author communicates, respecting Mr. Brainerd, is to be
   found almost in the same words in the Memoirs of his life, and in his
   Reflections upon it, which he afterwards published.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Importance and Advantage of a Thorough Knowledge of Divine Truth

  A Sermon

    by

  Jonathan Edwards

        [from Works (Worcester reprint), IV:1-15.]

    Hebrews 5:12 -- For when, for the time, ye ought to be teachers, ye have
    need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles
    of God; and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.

   These words are a complaint, which the apostle makes of a certain
   defect in the Christian Hebrews, to whom he wrote. Wherein we may
   observe,

   1. What the defect complained of is, viz., a want of such a proficiency
   in the knowledge of the doctrines and mysteries of religion, as might
   have been expected of them. The apostle complains of them, that they
   had not made that progress in their acquaintance with the things of
   divinity or things taught in the oracles of God, which they ought to
   have made. And he means to reprove them, not merely for their
   deficiency in spiritual and experimental knowledge of divine things,
   but for their deficiency in a doctrinal acquaintance with the
   principles of religion, and the truths of Christian divinity; as is
   evident by several things.

   It appears by the manner in which the apostle introduces this complaint
   or reproof. The occasion of his introducing it, is this: in the next
   verse but one preceding he mentions Christ's being a high priest after
   the order of Melchizedek: "Called of God a high priest after the order
   of Melchizedek." This Melchizedek being in the Old Testament, which was
   the oracles of God, held forth as an eminent type of Christ, and the
   account we there have of Melchizedek containing many gospel mysteries,
   these the apostle was willing to point out to the Christian Hebrews.
   But he apprehended that through their weakness in knowledge, and little
   acquaintance in mysteries of that nature, they would not understand
   him; and therefore breaks off for the present from saying anything
   about Melchizedek. Thus, in verse 11, "Of whom we have many things to
   say, and hard to be uttered; seeing ye are dull of hearing;" i.e.,
   there are many things concerning Melchizedek, which contain wonderful
   gospel mysteries, and which I would take notice of to you, were it not
   that I am afraid, that through your dullness and backwardness in
   understanding these things, you would only be puzzled and confounded by
   my discourse, and so receive no benefit; and that it would be too hard
   for you, as meat that is too strong.

   Then come in the words of the text: "For when, for the time, ye ought
   to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which be the
   first principles of the oracles of God; and are become such as have
   need of milk, and not of strong meat." As much as to say, Indeed it
   might have been expected of you, that you should have known enough of
   divinity, and the holy Scriptures, to be able to understand and digest
   such mysteries: but it is not so with you.

   Again, The apostle speaks of their proficiency in such knowledge as is
   conveyed and received by human teaching; as appears by that expression,
   "When for the time ye ought to be teachers;" which includes not only a
   practical and experimental, but also a doctrinal knowledge of the
   truths and mysteries of religion.

   Again, The apostle speaks of such a knowledge, whereby Christians are
   enabled to digest strong meat; i.e., to understand those things in
   divinity which are more abstruse and difficult to be understood, and
   which require great skill in things of this nature. This is more fully
   expressed in the two next verses: for everyone that useth milk, is
   unskillful in the word of righteousness; for he is a babe. But strong
   meat belongeth to them that are of full age, even those who, by reason
   of use, have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil."
   Again, It is such a knowledge, that proficiency in it shall carry
   persons beyond the first principles of religion. As here: "Ye have need
   that one teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles
   of God." Therefore the apostle, in the beginning of the next chapter,
   advises them, "to leave the first principles of the doctrine of Christ,
   and go on unto perfection."

   2. We may observe wherein the fault of this defect appears, viz., in
   that they had not made proficiency according to their time. For the
   time, they ought to have been teachers. As they were Christians, their
   business was to learn and gain Christian knowledge. They were scholars
   in the school of Christ; and if they had improved their time in
   learning, as they ought to have done, they might, by the time when the
   apostle wrote, have been fit to be teachers in this school. To whatever
   business any one is devoted, it may be expected that his perfection in
   it shall be answerable to the time he has had to learn and perfect
   himself-- Christians should not always remain babes, but should grow in
   Christian knowledge; and, leaving the food of babes, which is milk,
   should learn to digest strong meat.

   DOCTRINE: Every Christian should make a business of endeavoring to grow
   in knowledge in divinity.

   This is indeed esteemed the business of divines and ministers: it is
   commonly thought to be their work, by the study of the Scriptures, and
   other instructive books, to gain knowledge; and most seem to think that
   it may be left to them, as what belongeth not to others., But if the
   apostle had entertained this notion, he would never have blamed the
   Christian Hebrews for not having acquired knowledge enough to be
   teachers: or if he had thought, that this concerned Christians in
   general, only as a thing by the by, and that their time should not, in
   a considerable measure, be taken up with this business; he never would
   have so much blamed them, that their proficiency in knowledge had not
   been answerable to the time which they had had to learn.

   In handling this subject, I shall show,

   1. What divinity is.

   2. What kind of knowledge in divinity is intended.

   3. Why knowledge in divinity is necessary.

   4. Why all Christians should make a business of endeavoring to grow in
   this knowledge.

   First, I shall very briefly show what divinity is.

   Various definitions have been given of it by those who have treated on
   the subject. I shall not now stand to inquire which, according to the
   rules of art, is the most accurate definition; but shall so define or
   describe it, as I think has the greatest tendency to convey a notion of
   it to this auditory.

   By divinity is meant, that science or doctrine which comprehends all
   those truths and rules which concern the great business of religion.
   There are various kinds of arts and sciences taught and learned in the
   schools, which are conversant about various objects; about the works of
   nature in general; as philosophy; or the visible heavens, as astronomy;
   or the sea, as navigation; or the earth, as geography; or the body of
   man, as physic and anatomy; or the soul of man, with regard to its
   natural powers and qualities, as logic and pneumatology; or about human
   government, as politics and jurisprudence. But there is one science, or
   one certain kind of knowledge and doctrine, which is above all the
   rest, as it is concerning God and the great business of religion: this
   is divinity; which is not learned, as other sciences, merely by the
   improvement of man's natural reason, but is taught by God himself in a
   certain book that he hath given for that end, full of instruction. This
   is the rule which God hath given to the world to be their guide in
   searching after this kind of knowledge, and is a summary of all things
   of this nature needful for us to know. Upon this account divinity is
   rather called a doctrine, than an art or science.

   Indeed there is what is called natural religion or divinity. There are
   many truths concerning God, and our duty to him, which are evident by
   the light of nature. But Christian divinity, properly so called, is not
   evident by the light of nature; it depends on revelation. Such are our
   circumstances now in our fallen state, that nothing which it is needful
   for us to know concerning God, is manifest by the light of nature in
   the manner in which it is necessary for us to know it. For the
   knowledge of no truth in divinity is of any significance to us, any
   otherwise than, as it some way or other belongs to the gospel scheme,
   or as it relates to a Mediator. But the light of nature teaches us no
   truth of divinity in this matter. Therefore it cannot be said, that we
   come to the knowledge of any part of Christian divinity by the light of
   nature. The light of nature teaches no truth as it is in Jesus. It is
   only the word of God, contained in the Old and New Testament, which
   teaches us Christian divinity.

   Divinity comprehends all that is taught in the Scriptures, and so all
   that we need know, or is to be known, concerning God and Jesus Christ,
   concerning our duty to God, and our happiness in God. Divinity is
   commonly defined, the doctrine of living to God and by some who seem to
   be more accurate, the doctrine of living to God by Christ. It
   comprehends all Christian doctrines as they are in Jesus, and all
   Christian rules directing us in living to God by Christ. There is
   nothing in divinity, no one doctrine, no promise, no rule, but what
   some way or other relates to the Christian and divine life, or our
   living to God by Christ. They all relate to this, in two respects,
   viz., as they tend to promote our living to God here in this world, in
   a life of faith and holiness, and also as they tend to bring us to a
   life of perfect holiness and happiness, in the full enjoyment of God
   hereafter--But I hasten to the

   Second thing proposed, viz., To show what kind of knowledge in divinity
   is intended in the doctrine.

   Here I would observe:

   1. That there are two kinds of knowledge of the things of divinity,
   viz., speculative and practical, or in other terms, natural and
   spiritual. The former remains only in the head. No other faculty but
   the understanding is concerned in it. It consists in having a natural
   or rational knowledge of the things of religion, or such a knowledge as
   is to be obtained by the natural exercise of our own faculties, without
   any special illumination of the Spirit of God. The latter rests not
   entirely in the head, or in the speculative ideas of things; but the
   heart is concerned in it: it principally consists in the sense of the
   heart. The mere intellect, without the heart, the will or the
   inclination, is not the seat of it. And it may not only be called
   seeing, but feeling or tasting. Thus there is a difference between
   having a right speculative notion of the doctrines contained in the
   word of God, and having a due sense of them in the heart. In the former
   consists speculative or natural knowledge of the things of divinity; in
   the latter consists the spiritual or practical knowledge of them.

   2. Neither of these is intended in the doctrine exclusively of the
   other: but it is intended that we should seek the former in order to
   the latter. The latter, even a spiritual and practical knowledge of
   divinity, is of the greatest importance; for a speculative knowledge of
   it, without a spiritual knowledge, is in vain and to no purpose, but to
   make our condemnation the greater. Yet a speculative knowledge is also
   of infinite importance in this respect, that without it we can have no
   spiritual or practical knowledge; as may be shown by and by.

   I have already shown, that the apostle speaks not only of a spiritual
   knowledge, but of such knowledge as can be acquired, and communicated
   from one to another. Yet it is not to be thought, that he means this
   exclusively of the other,. But he would have the Christian Hebrews seek
   the one, in order to the other. Therefore the former is first and most
   directly intended; it is intended that Christians should, by reading
   and other proper means, seek a good rational knowledge of the things of
   divinity. The latter is more indirectly intended, since it is to be
   sought by the other, as its end.

   But I proceed to the third thing proposed, viz., to show the usefulness
   and necessity of knowledge in divinity.

   1. There is no other way by which any means of grace whatsoever can be
   of any benefit, but by knowledge. All teaching is in vain, without
   learning. Therefore, the preaching of the gospel would be wholly to no
   purpose, if it conveyed no knowledge to the mind. There is an order of
   men whom Christ has appointed on purpose to be teachers in his church.
   They are to teach the things of divinity. But they teach in vain, if no
   knowledge in these things is gained by their teaching. It is impossible
   that their teaching and preaching should be a means of grace, or of any
   good in the hearts of their hearers, any otherwise than by knowledge
   imparted to the understanding. Otherwise it would be of as much benefit
   to the auditory, if the minister should preach in some unknown tongue.
   All the difference is, that preaching in a known tongue conveys
   something to the understanding, which preaching in an unknown tongue
   doth not. On this account, such preaching must be unprofitable. Men in
   such things receive nothing, when they understand nothing; and are not
   at all edified, unless some knowledge be conveyed; agreeably to the
   apostle's arguing in 1 Cor. 14:2-6.

   No speech can be any means of grace, but by conveying knowledge.
   Otherwise the speech is as much lost as if there had been no man there,
   and he that spoke, had spoken only into the air; as it follows in the
   passage just quoted, verses 6-10. He that doth not understand, can
   receive no faith, nor any other grace; for God deals with man as with a
   rational creature; and when faith is in exercise, it is not about
   something he knows not what. Therefore hearing is absolutely necessary
   to faith; because hearing is necessary to understanding: Rom. 10:14,
   "How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?" So there
   can be no love without knowledge. It is not according to the nature of
   the human soul, to love an object which is entirely unknown. The heart
   cannot be set upon an object of which there is no idea in the
   understanding. The reasons which induce the soul to love, must first be
   understood, before they can have a reasonable influence on the heart.

   God hath given us the Bible, which is a book of instructions. But this
   book can be of no manner of profit to us, any otherwise than as it
   conveys some knowledge to the mind: it can profit us no more than if it
   were written in the Chinese or Tartarian language, of which we know not
   one word.

   So the sacraments of the gospel can have a proper effect no other way,
   than by conveying some knowledge. They represent certain things by
   visible signs. and what is the end of signs, but to convey some
   knowledge of the things signified? Such is the nature of man, that
   nothing can come at the heart, but through the door of the
   understanding: and there can be no spiritual knowledge of that of which
   there is not first a rational knowledge. It is impossible that any one
   should see the truth or excellency of any doctrine of the gospel, who
   knows not what that doctrine is. A man cannot see the wonderful
   excellency and love of Christ in doing such and such things for
   sinners, unless his understanding be first informed how those things
   were done. He cannot have a taste of the sweetness and divine
   excellency of such and such things contained in divinity, unless he
   first have a notion that there are such and such things.

   2. Without knowledge in divinity, none would differ from the most
   ignorant and barbarous heathens. The heathens remain in gross
   heathenish darkness, because they are not instructed, and have not
   obtained the knowledge of the truths of divinity. So if we live under
   the preaching of the gospel, this will make us to differ from them,
   only by conveying to us more knowledge of the things of divinity.

   3. If a man have no knowledge of these things, the faculty of reason in
   him will be wholly in vain. The faculty of reason and understanding was
   given for actual understanding and knowledge. If a man have no actual
   knowledge, the faculty or capacity of knowing is of no use to him. And
   if he have actual knowledge, yet if he be destitute of the knowledge of
   those things which are the last end of his being, and for the sake of
   the knowledge of which he had more understanding given him than the
   beasts; then still his faculty of reason is in vain; he might as well
   have been a beast, as a man with this knowledge. But the things of
   divinity are the things to know which we had the faculty of reason
   given us. They are the things which appertain to the end of our being,
   and to the great business for which we are made. Therefore a man cannot
   have his faculty of understanding to any purpose, any further than he
   hath knowledge of the things of divinity.

   So that this kind of knowledge is absolutely necessary. Other kinds of
   knowledge may be very useful. Some other sciences, such as astronomy,
   and natural philosophy, and geography, may be very excellent in their
   kind. But the knowledge of this divine science is infinitely more
   useful and important than of all other sciences whatever.

   I come now to the fourth, and principal thing proposed under the
   doctrine, viz., to give the reasons why all Christians should make a
   business of endeavoring to grow in the knowledge of divinity. This
   implies two things.

   1. That Christians ought not to content themselves with such degrees of
   knowledge in divinity as they have already obtained. It should not
   satisfy them that they know as much as is absolutely necessary to
   salvation, but should seek to make progress.

   2. That this endeavoring to make progress in such knowledge ought not
   to be attended to as a thing by the by, but all Christians should make
   a business of it: they should look upon it as a part of their daily
   business, and no small part of it neither. It should be attended to as
   a considerable part of the work of their high calling. The reason of
   both these may appear in the following things.

   (1.) Our business should doubtless much consist in employing those
   faculties, by which we are distinguished from the beasts, about those
   things which are the main end of those faculties. The reason why we
   have faculties superior to those of the brutes given us, is, that we
   are indeed designed for a superior employment. That which the Creator
   intended should be our main employment, is something above what he
   intended the beasts for, and therefore hath given us superior powers.
   Therefore, without doubt, it should be a considerable part of our
   business to improve those superior faculties. But the faculty by which
   we are chiefly distinguished from the brutes, is the faculty of
   understanding. It follows then, that we should make it our chief
   business to improve this faculty, and should by no means prosecute it
   as a business by the by. For us to make the improvement of this faculty
   a business by the by, is in effect for us to make the faculty of
   understanding itself a by faculty, if I may so speak, a faculty of less
   importance than others; whereas indeed it is the highest faculty we
   have.

   But we cannot make a business of the improvement of our intellectual
   faculty, any otherwise than by making a business of improving ourselves
   in actual understanding and knowledge. So that those who make not this
   very much their business, but, instead of improving their understanding
   to acquire knowledge, are chiefly devoted to their inferior powers, to
   provide wherewithal to please their senses, and gratify their animal
   appetites, and so rather make their understanding a servant to their
   inferior powers, than their inferior powers servants to their
   understanding; not only behave themselves in a manner not becoming
   Christians, but also act as if they had forgotten that they are men,
   and that God hath set them above the brutes, by giving them
   understanding.

   God hath given to man some things in common with the brutes, as his
   outward senses, his bodily appetites, a capacity of bodily pleasure and
   pain, and other animal faculties: and some things he hath given him
   superior to the brutes, the chief of which is a faculty of
   understanding and reason. Now God never gave man those faculties
   whereby he is above the brutes, to be subject to those which he hath in
   common with the brutes. This would be great confusion, and equivalent
   to making man to be a servant to the beasts. On the contrary, he has
   given those inferior powers to be employed in subserviency to man's
   understanding; and therefore it must be a great part of man's principal
   business, to improve his understanding by acquiring knowledge. If so,
   then it will follow, that it should be a main part of his business to
   improve his understanding in acquiring divine knowledge, or the
   knowledge of the things of divinity; for the knowledge of these things
   is the principal end of this faculty. God gave man the faculty of
   understanding, chiefly, that he might understand divine things.

   The wiser heathens were sensible that the main business of man was the
   improvement and exercise of his understanding. But they were in the
   dark, as they knew not the object about which the understanding should
   chiefly be employed. That science which many of them thought should
   chiefly employ the understanding, was philosophy; and accordingly they
   made it their chief business to study it. But we who enjoy the light of
   the gospel are more happy, we are not left, as to this particular, in
   the dark. God hath told us about what things we should chiefly employ
   our understandings, having given us a book full of divine instructions,
   holding forth many glorious objects about which all rational creatures
   should chiefly employ their understandings. These instructions are
   accommodated to persons of all capacities and conditions, and proper to
   be studied, not only by men of learning, but by persons of every
   character, learned and unlearned, young and old, men and women.
   Therefore the acquisition of knowledge in these things should be a main
   business of all those who have the advantage of enjoying the Holy
   Scriptures.

   (2.) The things of divinity are things of superlative excellency, and
   are worthy that all should make a business of endeavoring to grow in
   the knowledge of them. There are no things so worthy to be known as
   these things. They are as much above those things which are treated of
   in other sciences, as heaven is above the earth. God himself, the
   eternal Three in one, is the chief object of this science: in the next
   place, Jesus Christ, as Godman and Mediator, and the glorious work of
   redemption, the most glorious work that ever was wrought: then the
   great things of the heavenly world, the glorious and eternal
   inheritance purchased by Christ, and promised in the gospel; the work
   of the Holy Spirit of God on the hearts of men; our duty to God, and
   the way in which we ourselves may become like angels, and like God
   himself in our measure: all these are objects of this science.

   Such things as these have been the main subject of the study of the
   holy patriarchs, prophets, and apostles, and the most excellent men
   that ever were in the world, and are also the subject of the study of
   the angels in heaven; 1 Pet. 1:10,11,12.

   These things are so excellent and worthy to be known, that the
   knowledge of them will richly pay for all the pains and labor of an
   earnest seeking of it. If there were a great treasure of gold and
   pearls hid in the earth, but should accidentally be found, and should
   be opened among us with such circumstances that all might have as much
   as they could gather of it; would not every one think it worth his
   while to make a business of gathering it while it should last? But that
   treasure of divine knowledge, which is contained in the Scriptures, and
   is provided for every one to gather to himself as much of it as he can,
   is a far more rich treasure than any one of gold and pearls. How busy
   are all sorts of men, all over the world, in getting riches! But this
   knowledge is a far better kind of riches, than that after which they so
   diligently and laboriously pursue.

   3. The things of divinity not only concern ministers, but are of
   infinite importance to all Christians. It is not with the doctrines of
   divinity as it is with the doctrines of philosophy and other sciences.
   These last are generally speculative points, which are of little
   concern in human life; and it very little alters the case as to our
   temporal or spiritual interests, whether we know them or not.
   Philosophers differ about them, some being of one opinion, and others
   of another. And while they are engaged in warm disputes about them,
   others may well leave them to dispute among themselves, without
   troubling their heads much about them; it being of little concern to
   them, whether the one or the other be in the right.

   But it is not thus in matters of divinity. The doctrines: this nearly
   concern every one. They are about those things which relate to every
   man's eternal salvation and happiness. The common people cannot say,
   Let us leave these matters to ministers and divines; let them dispute
   them out among themselves as they can; they concern not us: for they
   are of infinite importance to every man. Those doctrines of divinity
   which relate to the essence, attributes, and subsistencies of God,
   concern all; as it is of infinite importance to common people, as well
   as to ministers, to know what kind of being God is. For he is the Being
   who hath made us all, "in whom we live, and move, and have our being;"
   who is the Lord of all; the Being to whom we are all accountable; is
   the last end of our being, and the only fountain of our happiness.

   The doctrines also which relate to Jesus Christ and his mediation, his
   incarnation, his life and death, his resurrection and ascension, his
   sitting at the right hand of the Father, his satisfaction and
   intercession, infinitely concern common people as well as divines. They
   stand in as much need of this Saviour, and of an interest in his person
   and offices, and the things which he hath done and suffered, as
   ministers and divines.

   The same may be said of the doctrines which relate to the manner of a
   sinner's justification, or the way in which he becomes interested in
   the mediation of Christ. They equally concern all; for all stand in
   equal necessity of justification before God. That eternal condemnation,
   to which we are all naturally exposed, is equally dreadful. So with
   respect to those doctrines of divinity, which relate to the work of the
   Spirit of God on the heart, in the application of redemption in our
   effectual calling and sanctification, all are equally concerned in
   them. There is no doctrine of divinity whatever, which doth not some
   way or other concern the eternal interest of every Christian. None of
   the things which God hath taught us in his word are needless
   speculations, or trivial matters; all of them are indeed important
   points.

   4. We may argue from the great things which God hath done in order to
   give us instruction in these things. As to other sciences, he hath left
   us to ourselves, to the light of our own reason. But the things of
   divinity being of infinitely greater importance to us, he hath not left
   us to an uncertain guide; but hath himself given us a revelation of the
   truth in these matters, and hath done very great things to convey and
   confirm to us this revelation; raising up many prophets in different
   ages, immediately inspiring them with his Holy Spirit, and confirming
   their doctrine with innumerable miracles or wonderful works out of the
   established course of nature. Yea, he raised up a succession of
   prophets, which was upheld for several ages.

   It was very much for this end that God separated the people of Israel,
   in so wonderful a manner, from all other people, and kept them
   separate; that to them he might commit the oracles of God, and that
   from them they might be communicated to the world. He hath also often
   sent angels to bring divine instructions to men; and hath often himself
   appeared to men in miraculous symbols or representations of his
   presence; and now in these last days hath sent his own Son into the
   world, to be his great prophet, to teach us divinity; Heb. 1 at the
   beginning. By means of all, God hath given a book of divine
   instructions, which contains the sum of divinity. Now, these things
   hath God done not only for the instruction of ministers and men of
   learning; but for the instruction of all men, of all sorts, learned and
   unlearned, men, women, and children. And certainly if God doth such
   great things to teach us, we ought not to do little to learn.

   God hath not made giving instructions to men in things of divinity a
   business by the by; but a business which he hath undertaken and
   prosecuted in a course of great and wonderful dispensations, as an
   affair in which his heart hath been greatly engaged; which is sometimes
   in Scripture signified by the expression of God's rising early to teach
   us, and to send prophets and teachers to us. Jer. 7:25, "Since that day
   that your fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt, unto this day, I
   have even sent unto you all my servants the prophets, daily rising up
   early and sending them" And so, verse 13, "I spake unto you, rising up
   early, and speaking." This is a figurative speech, signifying, that God
   hath not done this as a by business, but as a business of great
   importance, in which he took great care, and had his heart much
   engaged; because persons are wont to rise early to prosecute such
   business as they are earnestly engaged in.-- If God hath been so
   engaged in teaching, certainly we should not be negligent in learning;
   nor should we make growing in knowledge a by business, but a great part
   of the business of our lives.

   5. It may be argued from the abundance of the instructions which God
   hath given us, from the largeness of that book which God hath given to
   teach us divinity, and from the great variety that is therein
   contained. Much was taught by Moses of old, which we have transmitted
   down to us; after that, other books were from time to time added; much
   is taught us by David and Solomon; and many and excellent are the
   instructions communicated by the prophets: yet God did not think all
   this enough, but after this sent Christ and his apostles, by whom there
   is added a great and excellent treasure to that holy book, which is to
   be our rule in the study of divinity.

   This book was written for the use of all; all are directed to search
   the Scriptures. John 5:39, "Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think
   ye have eternal life; and they are they that testify of me;" and Isaiah
   34:16, "Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read." They that read
   and understand are pronounced blessed. Rev. 1:3, "Blessed is he that
   readeth, and they that understand the words of this prophecy." If this
   be true of that particular book of the Revelation, much more is it true
   of the Bible in general. Nor is it to be believed that God would have
   given instructions in such abundance, if he had intended that receiving
   instruction should be only a by concernment with us.

   It is to be considered, that all those abundant instructions which are
   contained in the Scriptures were written for that end, that they might
   be understood; otherwise they are not instructions. That which is not
   given that the learner may understand it, is not given for the
   learner's instruction; and unless we endeavor to grow in the knowledge
   of divinity, a very great part of those instructions will to us be in
   vain; for we can receive benefit by no more of the Scriptures than we
   understand, no more than if they were locked up in an unknown tongue.
   We have reason to bless God that he hath given us such various and
   plentiful instruction in his word; but we shall be hypocritical in so
   doing, if we, after all, content ourselves with but little of this
   instruction.

   When God hath opened a very large treasure before us, for the supply of
   our wants, and we thank him that he hath given us so much; if at the
   same time we be willing to remain destitute of the greatest part of it,
   because we are too lazy to gather it, this will not show the sincerity
   of our thankfulness. We are now under much greater advantages to
   acquire knowledge in divinity, than the people of God were of old,
   because since that time, the canon of Scripture is much increased. But
   if we be negligent of our advantages, we may be never the better for
   them, and may remain with as little knowledge as they.

   6. However diligently we apply ourselves, there is room enough to
   increase our knowledge in divinity, without coming to an end. None have
   this excuse to make for not diligently applying themselves to gain
   knowledge in divinity, that they know all already; nor can they make
   this excuse, that they have no need diligently to apply themselves, in
   order to know all that is to be known. None can excuse themselves for
   want of business in which to employ themselves. Here is room enough to
   employ ourselves forever in this divine science, with the utmost
   application. Those who have applied themselves most closely, have
   studied the longest, and have made the greatest attainments in this
   knowledge, know but little of what is to be known. The subject is
   inexhaustible. That divine Being, who is the main subject of this
   science, is infinite, and there is no end to the glory of his
   perfections. His works at the same time are wonderful, and cannot be
   found out to perfection; especially the work of redemption, which is
   that work of God about which the science of divinity is chiefly
   conversant, is full of unsearchable wonders.

   The word of God, which is given for our instruction in divinity,
   contains enough in it to employ us to the end of our lives, and then we
   shall leave enough uninvestigated to employ the heads of the ablest
   divines to the end of the world. The Psalmist found an end to the
   things that are human; but he could never find an end to what is
   contained in the word of God; Psalm 119:96, "I have seen an end to all
   perfection; but thy commandment is exceeding broad." There is enough in
   this divine science to employ the understandings of saints and angels
   to all eternity.

   7. It doubtless concerns every one to endeavor to excel in the
   knowledge of things which pertain to his profession or principal
   calling. If it concerns men to excel in any thing or in any wisdom or
   knowledge at all, it certainly concerns them to excel in the affairs of
   their main profession and work. But the calling and work of every
   Christian is to live to God. This is said to be his high calling,
   Phil.3:14. This is the business, and, if I may so speak, the trade of a
   Christian, his main work, and indeed should be his only work. No
   business should be done by a Christian, but as it is some way or other
   a part of this. Therefore certainly the Christian should endeavor to be
   well acquainted with those things which belong to this work, that he
   may fulfill it, and be thoroughly furnished to it.

   It becomes one who is called to be a soldier, and to go a warfare, to
   endeavor to excel in the art of war. It becomes one who is called to be
   a mariner, and to spend his life in sailing the ocean, to endeavor to
   excel in the art of navigation. It becomes one who professes to be a
   physician, and devotes himself to that work, to endeavor to excel in
   the knowledge of those things which pertain to the art of physic. So it
   becomes all such as profess to be Christians, and to devote themselves
   to the practice of Christianity, to endeavor to excel in the knowledge
   of divinity.

   8. It may be argued from this, that God hath appointed an order of men
   for this end, to assist persons in gaining knowledge in these things.
   He hath appointed them to be teachers. 1 Cor. 12:28, "And God hath set
   some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly
   teachers." Eph. 4:11,12, "He gave some apostles, some prophets, some
   evangelists, some pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the
   saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of
   Christ." If God hath set them to be teachers, making that their
   business, then he hath made it their business to impart knowledge. But
   what kind of knowledge? Not the knowledge of philosophy, or of human
   laws, or of mechanical arts, but of divinity.

   If God hath made it the business of some to be teachers, it will
   follow, that he hath made it the business of others to be learners; for
   teachers and learners are correlates, one of which was never intended
   to be without the other. God hath never made it the duty of some to
   take pains to teach those who are not obliged to take pains to learn.
   He hath not commanded ministers to spend themselves, in order to impart
   knowledge to those who are not obliged to apply themselves to receive
   it.

   The name by which Christians are commonly called in the New Testament
   is disciples, the signification of which word is scholars or learners.
   All Christians are put into the school of Christ, where their business
   is to learn, or receive knowledge from Christ, their common master and
   teacher, and from those inferior teachers appointed by him to instruct
   in his name.

   9. God hath in the Scriptures plainly revealed it to be his will, that
   all Christians should diligently endeavor to excel in the knowledge of
   divine things. It is the revealed will of God, that Christians should
   not only have some knowledge of things of this nature, but that they
   should be enriched with all knowledge: 1 Cor.1:4-5, "I thank my God
   always on your behalf, for the grace of God that is given you by Jesus
   Christ, that in every thing ye are enriched by him, in all utterance,
   and in all knowledge." So the apostle earnestly prayed, that the
   Christian Philippians might abound more and more, not only in love, but
   in Christian knowledge: Philip. 1:9, "And this I pray, that your love
   may abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment." So the
   Apostle Peter advises to "give all diligence, to add to faith virtue,
   and to virtue knowledge," 2 Pet. 1:5. And the Apostle Paul, in the next
   chapter to that wherein is the text, counsels the Christian Hebrews,
   leaving the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, to go on to
   perfection. He would by no means have them always to rest only in those
   fundamental doctrines of repentance, and faith, and the resurrection
   from the dead, and the eternal judgment, in which they were
   indoctrinated when they were first baptized, and had the apostle's
   hands laid on them, at their first initiation in Christianity. See Heb.
   6, at the beginning.

   Application

   The use that I would make of this doctrine is, to exhort all diligently
   to endeavor to gain this kind of knowledge.

   Consider yourselves as scholars or disciples, put into the school of
   Christ, and therefore be diligent to make proficiency in Christian
   knowledge. Content not yourselves with this, that you have been taught
   your catechism in your childhood, and that you know as much of the
   principles of religion as is necessary to salvation. So you will be
   guilty of what the apostle warns against, viz., going no further than
   laying the foundation of repentance from dead works, &c.

   You are all called to be Christians, and this is your profession.
   Endeavor, therefore, to acquire knowledge in things which pertain to
   your profession.-- Let not your teachers have cause to complain, that
   while they spend and are spent, to impart knowledge to you, you take
   little pains to learn. It is a great encouragement to an instructor, to
   have such to teach as make a business of learning, bending their minds
   to it. This makes teaching a pleasure, when otherwise it will be a very
   heavy and burdensome task.

   You all have by you a large treasure of divine knowledge, in that you
   have the Bible in your hands; therefore be not contented in possessing
   but little of this treasure. God hath spoken much to you in the
   Scripture; labor to understand as much of what he saith as you can. God
   hath made you all reasonable creatures; therefore let not the noble
   faculty of reason or understanding lie neglected. Content not
   yourselves with having so much knowledge as is thrown in your way, and
   as you receive in some sense unavoidably by the frequent inculcation of
   divine truth in the preaching of the word, of which you are obliged to
   be hearers, or as you accidentally gain in conversation; but let it be
   very much your business to search for it, and that with the same
   diligence and labor with which men are wont to dig in mines of silver
   and gold.

   Especially I would advise those that are young to employ themselves in
   this way. Men are never too old to learn; but the time of youth is
   especially the time for learning; it is especially proper for gaining
   and storing up knowledge. Further, to stir up all, both old and young,
   to this duty, let me entreat you to consider,

   1. If you apply yourselves diligently to this work, you will not want
   employment, when you are at leisure from your common secular business.
   In this way, you may find something in which you may profitably employ
   yourselves these long winter evenings. You will find something else to
   do, besides going about from house to house, spending one hour after
   another in unprofitable conversation, or, at best, to no other purpose
   but to amuse yourselves, to fill up and wear away your time. And it is
   to be feared that very much of the time that is spent in our winter
   evening visits, is spent to a much worse purpose than that which I have
   now mentioned. Solomon tells us, Prov. 10:19, "That in the multitude of
   words, there wanteth not sin." And is not this verified in those who
   find nothing else to do for so great a part of the winter, but to go to
   one another's houses, and spend the time in such talk as comes next, or
   such as any one's present disposition happens to suggest? Some
   diversion is doubtless lawful; but for Christians to spend so much of
   their time, so many long evenings, in no other conversation than that
   which tends to divert and amuse, if nothing worse, is a sinful way of
   spending time, and tends to poverty of soul at least, if not to outward
   poverty: Prov. 14:23, "In all labor there is profit; but the talk of
   the lips tendeth only to penury!" Besides, when persons for so much of
   their time have nothing else to do but to sit, and talk, and chat in
   one another's chimney corners, there is great danger of falling into
   foolish and sinful conversation, venting their corrupt dispositions, in
   talking against others, expressing their jealousies and evil surmises
   concerning their neighbors; not considering what Christ hath said,
   Matt. 12:36, "Of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
   account in the day of judgment." If you would comply with what you have
   heard from this doctrine, you would find something else to spend your
   winters in, one winter after another, besides contention, or talking
   about those public affairs which tend to contention. Young people might
   find something else to do, besides spending their time in vain company;
   something that would be much more profitable to themselves, as it would
   really turn to some good account; something, in doing which they would
   both be more out of the devil's way, the way of temptation, and be more
   in the way of duty, and of a divine blessing. And even aged people
   would have something to employ themselves in after they are become
   incapable of bodily labor. Their time, as is now often the case, would
   not lie heavy upon their hands, as they would, with both profit and
   pleasure, be engaged in searching the Scriptures, and in comparing and
   meditating upon the various truths which they should find there.

   2. This would be a noble way of spending your time. The Holy Spirit
   gives the Bereans this epithet, because they diligently employed
   themselves in this business: Acts 17:11, "These were more noble than
   those of Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all
   readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those
   things ere so." This is very much the employment of heaven. The
   inhabitants of that world spend much of their time in searching into
   the great things of divinity, and endeavoring to acquire knowledge in
   them, as we are told of the angels, 1 Pet. 1:12, "Which things the
   angels desire to look into." This will be very agreeable to what you
   hope will be your business to all eternity, as you doubtless hope to
   join in the same employment with the angels of light. Solomon says,
   Prov. 25:2, "It is the honor of kings to search out a matter;" and
   certainly, above all others, to search out divine matters. Now if this
   be the honor even of kings, is it not equally, if not much more, your
   honor?

   3. This is a pleasant way of improving time. Knowledge is pleasant and
   delightful to intelligent creatures, and above all the knowledge of
   divine things; for in them are the most excellent truths, and the most
   beautiful and amiable objects held forth to view. However tedious the
   labor necessarily attending this business may be, yet the knowledge
   once obtained will richly requite the pains taken to obtain it. "When
   wisdom entereth the heart, knowledge is pleasant to the soul," Prov.
   2:10.

   4. This knowledge is exceeding useful in Christian practice. Such as
   have much knowledge in divinity have great means and advantages for
   spiritual and saving knowledge; for no means of grace, as was said
   before, have their effect on the heart, otherwise than by the knowledge
   they impart. The more you have of a rational knowledge of the things of
   the gospel, the more opportunity will there be, when the Spirit shall
   be breathed into your heart, to see the excellency of these things, and
   to taste the sweetness of them. The Heathens, who have no rational
   knowledge of the things of the gospel, have no opportunity to see the
   excellency of them; and therefore the more rational knowledge of these
   things you have, the more opportunity and advantage you have to see the
   divine excellency and glory of them.

   Again, The more knowledge you have of divine things, the better will
   you know your duty; your knowledge will be of great use to direct you
   as to your duty in particular cases. You will also be the better
   furnished against the temptations of the devil. For the devil often
   takes the advantage of persons' ignorance to ply them with temptations
   which otherwise would have no hold of them. By having much knowledge,
   you will be under greater advantages to conduct yourselves with
   prudence and discretion in your Christian course, and so to live much
   more to the honor of God and religion. Many who mean well, and are full
   of a good spirit, yet, for want of prudence, conduct themselves so as
   to wound religion. Many have a zeal of God, which doth more hurt than
   good, because it is not according to knowledge, Rom. 10:2. The reason
   why many good men behave no better in many instances, is not so much
   that they want grace, as that they want knowledge.

   Besides, an increase of knowledge would be a great help to profitable
   conversation. It would supply you with matter for conversation when you
   come together, or when you visit your neighbors: and so you would have
   less temptation to spend the time in such conversation as tends to your
   own and others' hurt.

   5. Consider the advantages you are under to grow in the knowledge of
   divinity. We are under far greater advantages to gain much knowledge in
   divinity now, than God's people under the Old Testament, both because
   the canon of Scripture is so much enlarged since that time, and also
   because evangelical truths are now so much more plainly revealed. So
   that common men are now in some respects under advantages to know more
   of divinity, than the greatest prophets were then. Thus that saying of
   Christ is in a sense applicable to us, Luke 10:23,24, "Blessed are the
   eyes which see the things which ye see. For I tell you, that many
   prophets and kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and
   have not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have
   not heard them." We are in some respects under far greater advantages
   for gaining knowledge, now in these latter ages of the church, than
   Christians were formerly; especially by reason of the art of printing,
   of which God hath given us the benefit, whereby Bibles and other books
   of divinity are exceedingly multiplied, and persons may now be
   furnished with helps for the obtaining of Christian knowledge, at a
   much easier and cheaper rate than they formerly could.

   6. We know not what opposition we may meet with in the principles which
   we hold in divinity. We know that there are many adversaries to the
   gospel and its truths. if therefore we embrace those truths, we must
   expect to be attacked by the said adversaries; and unless we be well
   informed concerning divine things, how shall we be able to defend
   ourselves? Besides, the Apostle Peter enjoins it upon us, always to be
   ready to give an answer to every man who asketh us a reason of the hope
   that is in us. But this we cannot expect to do without a considerable
   knowledge in divine things.

   I shall now conclude my discourse with some directions for the
   acquisition of this knowledge.

   1. Be assiduous in reading the holy Scriptures. This is the fountain
   whence all knowledge in divinity must be derived. Therefore let not
   this treasure lie by you neglected. Every man of common understanding
   who can read, may, if he please, become well acquainted with the
   Scriptures. And what an excellent attainment would this be!

   2. Content not yourselves with only a cursory reading, without
   regarding the sense. This is an ill way of reading, to which, however,
   many accustom themselves all their days. When you read, observe what
   you read. Observe how things come in. Take notice of the drift of the
   discourse, and compare one Scripture with another. For the Scripture,
   by the harmony of the different parts of it, casts great light upon
   itself. We are expressly directed by Christ to search the Scriptures,
   which evidently intends something more than a mere cursory reading. And
   use means to find out the meaning of the Scripture. When you have it
   explained in the preaching of the word, take notice of it; and if at
   any time a Scripture that you did not understand be cleared up to your
   satisfaction, mark it, lay it up, and if possible remember it.

   3. Procure, and diligently use other books which may help you to grow
   in this knowledge. There are many excellent books extant, which might
   greatly forward you in this knowledge, and afford you a very profitable
   and pleasant entertainment in your leisure hours. There is doubtless a
   great defect in many, that through a lothness to be at a little
   expense, they furnish themselves with no more helps of this nature.
   They have a few books indeed, which now and then on Sabbath days they
   read; but they have had them so long, and read them so often, that they
   are weary of them, and it is now become a dull story, a mere task to
   read them.

   4. Improve conversation with others to this end. How much might persons
   promote each other's knowledge in divine things, if they would improve
   conversation as they might; if men that are ignorant were not ashamed
   to show their ignorance, and were willing to learn of others; if those
   that have knowledge would communicate it, without pride and
   ostentation; and if all were more disposed to enter on such
   conversation as would be for their mutual edification and instruction.

   5. Seek not to grow in knowledge chiefly for the sake of applause, and
   to enable you to dispute with others; but seek it for the benefit of
   your souls, and in order to practice. If applause be your end, you will
   not be so likely to be led to the knowledge of the truth, but may
   justly, as often is the case of those who are proud of their knowledge,
   be led into error to your own perdition. This being your end, if you
   should obtain much rational knowledge, it would not be likely to be of
   any benefit to you, but would puff you up with pride: 1 Cor. 8:1,
   "Knowledge puffeth up."

   6. Seek to God, that he would direct you, and bless you, in this
   pursuit after knowledge. This is the apostle's direction, James 1:5:
   "If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, who giveth to all
   liberally, and upbraideth not." God is the fountain of all divine
   knowledge. Prov. 2:6, "The Lord giveth wisdom: out of his mouth cometh
   knowledge and understanding." Labor to be sensible of your own
   blindness and ignorance, and your need of the help of God, lest you be
   led into error, instead of true knowledge. 1 Cor. 3:18, "If any man
   would be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be wise."

   8. (sic) Practice according to what knowledge you have. This will be
   the way to know more. The Psalmist warmly recommends this way of
   seeking knowledge in divinity, from his own experience: Psalm 119:100,
   "I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts."
   Christ also recommends the same: John 7:17, "If any man will do his
   will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I
   speak of myself."
     __________________________________________________________________

The Excellency of Christ

  a Sermon by Jonathan Edwards

    "And one of the elders saith unto me, Weep not: behold, the Lion of the
    tribe of Judah, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the book, and to
    loose the seven seals thereof. And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the
    throne, and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb
    as it had been slain. -- Rev. 5:5-6

  Introduction

   The visions and revelations the apostle John had of the future events
   of God's providence, are here introduced with a vision of the book of
   God's decrees, by which those events were fore-ordained. This is
   represented (Revelation 5:1) as a book in the right hand of him who sat
   on the throne, "written within and on the back side, and sealed with
   seven seals." Books, in the form in which they were wont of old to be
   made, were broad leaves of parchment or paper, or something of that
   nature, joined together at one edge, and so rolled up together, and
   then sealed, or some way fastened together, to prevent their unfolding
   and opening. Hence we read of the roll of a book Jer. 36:2. It seems to
   have been such a book that John had a vision of here; and therefore it
   is said to be "written within and on the back side," i. e. on the
   inside pages, and also on one of the outside pages, namely, that which
   it was rolled in, in rolling the book up together. And it is said to be
   "sealed with seven seals," to signify that what was written in it was
   perfectly hidden and secret; or that God's decrees of future events are
   sealed, and shut up from all possibility of being discovered by
   creatures, till God is pleased to make them known. We find that seven
   is often used in Scripture as the number of perfection, to signify the
   superlative or most perfect degree of anything, which probably arose
   from this, that on the seventh day God beheld the works of creation
   finished, and rested and rejoiced in them, as being complete and
   perfect.

   When John saw this book, he tells us, he "saw a strong angel
   proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to
   loose the seals thereof? And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither
   under the earth, was able to open the book, neither to look thereon."
   And that he wept much, because "no man was found worthy to open and
   read the book, neither to look thereon." And then tells us how his
   tears were dried up, namely, that "one of the elders said unto him,
   "Weep not, Behold the Lion of the tribe of Judah hath prevailed" etc.
   as in the text. Though no man nor angel, nor any mere creature, was
   found either able to loose the seals, or worthy to be admitted to the
   privilege of reading the book, yet this was declared, for the comfort
   of this beloved disciple, that Christ was found both able and worthy.
   And we have an account in the succeeding chapters how he actually did
   it, opening the seals in order, first one, and then another, revealing
   what God had decreed should come to pass hereafter. And we have an
   account in this chapter, of his coming and taking the book out of the
   right hand of him that sat on the throne, and of the joyful praises
   that were sung to him in heaven and earth on that occasion.

   Many things might be observed in the words of the text; but it is to my
   present purpose only to take notice of the two distinct appellations
   here given to Christ.
    1. He is called a Lion. Behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah. He
       seems to be called the Lion of the tribe of Judah, in allusion to
       what Jacob said in his blessing of the tribe on his death-bed; who,
       when he came to bless Judah, compares him to a lion, Gen. 49:9.
       "Judah is a lion's whelp; from the prey, my son, thou art gone up:
       he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who
       shall rouse him up?" And also to the standard of the camp of Judah
       in the wilderness on which was displayed a lion, according to the
       ancient tradition of the Jews. It is much on account of the valiant
       acts of David that the tribe of Judah, of which David was, is in
       Jacob's prophetical blessing compared to a lion; but more
       especially with an eye to Jesus Christ, who also was of that tribe,
       and was descended of David, and is in our text called "the Root of
       David"; and therefore Christ is here called "the Lion of the tribe
       of Judah."
    2. He is called a Lamb. John was told of a Lion that had prevailed to
       open the book, and probably expected to see a lion in his vision;
       but while he is expecting, behold a Lamb appears to open the book,
       an exceeding diverse kind of creature from a lion. A lion is a
       devourer, one that is wont to make terrible slaughter of others;
       and no creature more easily falls a prey to him than a lamb. And
       Christ is here represented not only as a Lamb, a creature very
       liable to be slain, but a "Lamb as it had been slain," that is,
       with the marks of its deadly wounds appearing on it.

   That which I would observe from the words, for the subject of my
   present discourse, is this, namely --

   There is an admirable conjunction of diverse excellencies in Jesus
   Christ.

   The lion and the lamb, though very diverse kinds of creatures, yet have
   each their peculiar excellencies. The lion excels in strength, and in
   the majesty of his appearance and voice: the lamb excels in meekness
   and patience, besides the excellent nature of the creature as good for
   food, and yielding that which is fit for our clothing and being
   suitable to be offered in sacrifice to God. But we see that Christ is
   in the text compared to both, because the diverse excellencies of both
   wonderfully meet in him, -- In handling this subject I would

   [42]First, Show wherein there is an admirable conjunction of diverse
   excellencies in Christ.
   [43]Second, Show how this admirable conjunction of excellencies appear
   in Christ's acts.
   [44]Third, make application.

Part One

   First, I would show wherein there is an admirable conjunction of
   diverse excellencies in Jesus Christ. which appears in three things:

   [45]A) There is a conjunction of such excellencies in Christ, as, in
   our manner of conceiving, are very diverse one from another.

   [46]B) There is in him a conjunction of such really diverse
   excellencies, as otherwise would have seemed to us utterly incompatible
   in the same subject.

   [47]C) Such diverse excellencies are exercised in him towards men that
   otherwise would have seemed impossible to be exercised towards the same
   object.

   A) There is a conjunction of such excellencies in Christ as, in our
   manner of conceiving, are very diverse one from another. Such are the
   various divine perfections and excellencies that Christ is possessed
   of. Christ is a divine person, and therefore has all the attributes of
   God. The difference between these is chiefly relative, and in our
   manner of conceiving them. And those which, in this sense, are most
   diverse, meet in the person of Christ. I shall mention two instances.
    1. There do meet in Jesus Christ infinite highness and infinite
       condescension.
       Christ, as he is God, is infinitely great and high above all. He is
       higher than the kings of the earth; for he is King of kings, and
       Lord of lords. He is higher than the heavens, and higher than the
       highest angels of heaven. So great is he, that all men, all kings
       and princes, are as worms of the dust before him; all nations are
       as the drop of the bucket, and the light dust of the balance; yea,
       and angels themselves are as nothing before him. He is so high,
       that he is infinitely above any need of us; above our reach, that
       we cannot be profitable to him; and above our conceptions, that we
       cannot comprehend him. Prov. 30:4 "What is his name, and what is
       his Son's name, if thou canst tell?" Our understandings, if we
       stretch them never so far, cannot reach up to his divine glory. Job
       11:8 "It is high as heaven, what canst thou do?" Christ is the
       Creator and great Possessor of heaven and earth. He is sovereign
       Lord of all. He rules over the whole universe, and doth whatsoever
       pleaseth him. His knowledge is without bound. His wisdom is
       perfect, and what none can circumvent. His power is infinite, and
       none can resist Him. His riches are immense and inexhaustible. His
       majesty is infinitely awful.
       And yet he is one of infinite condescension. None are so low or
       inferior, but Christ's condescension is sufficient to take a
       gracious notice of them. He condescends not only to the angels,
       humbling himself to behold the things that are done in heaven, but
       he also condescends to such poor creatures as men; and that not
       only so as to take notice of princes and great men, but of those
       that are of meanest rank and degree, "the poor of the world," James
       2:5. Such as are commonly despised by their fellow creatures,
       Christ does not despise. I Cor. 1:28 "Base things of the world, and
       things that are despised, hath God chosen." Christ condescends to
       take notice of beggars Luke 16:22 and people of the most despised
       nations. In Christ Jesus is neither "Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor
       free" (Col. 3:11). He that is thus high condescends to take a
       gracious notice of little children Matt. 19:14. "Suffer little
       children to come unto me." Yea, which is more, his condescension is
       sufficient to take a gracious notice of the most unworthy, sinful
       creatures, those that have no good deservings, and those that have
       infinite ill deservings.
       Yea, so great is his condescension, that it is not only sufficient
       to take some gracious notice of such as these, but sufficient for
       every thing that is an act of condescension. His condescension is
       great enough to become their friend, to become their companion, to
       unite their souls to him in spiritual marriage. It is enough to
       take their nature upon him, to become one of them, that he may be
       one with them. Yea, it is great enough to abase himself yet lower
       for them, even to expose himself to shame and spitting; yea, to
       yield up himself to an ignominious death for them. And what act of
       condescension can be conceived of greater? Yet such an act as this,
       has his condescension yielded to, for those that are so low and
       mean, despicable and unworthy!
       Such a conjunction of infinite highness and low condescension, in
       the same person, is admirable. We see, by manifold instances, what
       a tendency a high station has in men, to make them to be of a quite
       contrary disposition. If one worm be a little exalted above
       another, by having more dust, or a bigger dunghill, how much does
       he make of himself! What a distance does he keep from those that
       are below him! And a little condescension is what he expects should
       be made much of, and greatly acknowledged. Christ condescends to
       wash our feet; but how would great men, (or rather the bigger
       worms,) account themselves debased by acts of far less
       condescension!
    2. There meet in Jesus Christ, infinite justice and infinite grace.
       As Christ is a divine person, he is infinitely holy and just,
       hating sin, and disposed to execute condign punishment for sin. He
       is the Judge of the world, and the infinitely just Judge of it, and
       will not at all acquit the wicked, or by any means clear the
       guilty.
       And yet he is infinitely gracious and merciful. Though his justice
       be so strict with respect to all sin, and every breach of the law,
       yet he has grace sufficient for every sinner, and even the chief of
       sinners. And it is not only sufficient for the most unworthy to
       show them mercy, and bestow some good upon them, but to bestow the
       greatest good; yea, it is sufficient to bestow all good upon them,
       and to do all things for them. There is no benefit or blessing that
       they can receive, so great but the grace of Christ is sufficient to
       bestow it on the greatest sinner that ever lived. And not only so,
       but so great is his grace, that nothing is too much as the means of
       this good. It is sufficient not only to do great things, but also
       to suffer in order to do it, and not only to suffer, but to suffer
       most extremely even unto death, the most terrible of natural evils;
       and not only death, but the most ignominious and tormenting, and
       every way the most terrible that men could inflict; yea, and
       greater sufferings than men could inflict, who could only torment
       the body. He had sufferings in his soul, that were the more
       immediate fruits of the wrath of God against the sins of those he
       undertakes for.
       B) There do meet in the person of Christ such really diverse
       excellencies, which otherwise would have been thought utterly
       incompatible in the same subject; such as are conjoined in no other
       person whatever, either divine, human, or angelical; and such as
       neither men nor angels would ever have imagined could have met
       together in the same person, had it not been seen in the person of
       Christ. I would give some instances.
         1. In the person of Christ do meet together infinite glory and
            lowest humility. Infinite glory, and the virtue of humility,
            meet in no other person but Christ. They meet in no created
            person; for no created person has infinite glory, and they
            meet in no other divine person but Christ. For though the
            divine nature be infinitely abhorrent to pride, yet humility
            is not properly predicable of God the Father, and the Holy
            Ghost, that exist only in the divine nature; because it is a
            proper excellency only of a created nature; for it consists
            radically in a sense of a comparative lowness and littleness
            before God, or the great distance between God and the subject
            of this virtue; but it would be a contradiction to suppose any
            such thing in God.
            But in Jesus Christ, who is both God and man, those two
            diverse excellencies are sweetly united. He is a person
            infinitely exalted in glory and dignity. Phil. 2:6. "Being in
            the form of God, he thought it not robbery to be equal with
            God." There is equal honor due to him with the Father. John
            5:23. "That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor
            the Father." God himself says to him, "thy throne, O God, is
            for ever and ever," Heb. 1:8. And there is the same supreme
            respect and divine worship paid to him by the angels of
            heaven, as to God the Father, ver. 6. "Let all the angels of
            God worship him."
            But however he is thus above all, yet he is lowest of all in
            humility. There never was so great an instance of this virtue
            among either men or angels, as Jesus. None ever was so
            sensible of the distance between God and him, or had a heart
            so lowly before God, as the man Christ Jesus. Matt. 11:29.
            What a wonderful spirit of humility appeared in him, when he
            was here upon earth, in all his behavior! In his contentment
            in his mean outward condition, contentedly living in the
            family of Joseph the carpenter, and Mary his mother, for
            thirty years together, and afterwards choosing outward
            meanness, poverty, and contempt, rather than earthly
            greatness; in his washing his disciples' feet, and in all his
            speeches and deportment towards them; in his cheerfully
            sustaining the form of a servant through his whole life, and
            submitting to such immense humiliation at death!
         2. In the person of Christ do meet together infinite majesty and
            transcendent meekness. These again are two qualifications that
            meet together in no other person but Christ. Meekness,
            properly so called, is a virtue proper only to the creature:
            we scarcely ever find meekness mentioned as a divine attribute
            in Scripture; at least not in the New Testament; for thereby
            seems to be signified, a calmness and quietness of spirit,
            arising from humility in mutable beings that are naturally
            liable to be put into a ruffle by the assaults of a
            tempestuous and injurious world. But Christ, being both God
            and man, hath both infinite majesty and superlative meekness.
            Christ was a person of infinite majesty. It is he that is
            spoken of, Psalm 45:3. "Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most
            mighty, with thy glory and thy majesty." It is he that is
            mighty, that rideth on the heavens, and his excellency on the
            sky. It is he that is terrible out of his holy places; who is
            mightier than the noise of many waters, yea, than the mighty
            waves of the sea: before whom a fire goeth, and burneth up his
            enemies round about; at whose presence the earth quakes, and
            the hills melt; who sitteth on the circle of the earth, and
            all the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers, who rebukes
            the sea, and maketh it dry and drieth up the rivers, whose
            eyes are as a flame of fire, from whose presence, and from the
            glory of whose power, the wicked shall be punished with
            everlasting destruction; who is the blessed and only
            Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, who hath
            heaven for his throne, and the earth for his footstool, and is
            the high and lofty One who inhabits eternity, whose kingdom is
            an everlasting kingdom, and of whose dominion there is no end.
            And yet he was the most marvellous instance of meekness, and
            humble quietness of spirit, that ever was; agreeable to the
            prophecies of him, Matthew 21:4f "All this was done, that it
            might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying,
            Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh unto
            thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an
            ass." And, agreeable to what Christ declares of himself, Matt.
            11:29. "I am meek and lowly in heart." And agreeable to what
            was manifest in his behavior: for there never was such an
            instance seen on earth, of a meek behavior, under injuries and
            reproaches, and towards enemies; who, when he was reviled,
            reviled not again. He had a wonderful spirit of forgiveness,
            was ready to forgive his worst enemies, and prayed for them
            with fervent and effectual prayers. With what meekness did he
            appear in the ring of soldiers that were contemning and
            mocking him; he was silent, and opened not his mouth, but went
            as a lamb to the slaughter. Thus is Christ a Lion in majesty
            and a Lamb in meekness.
         3. There meet in the person of Christ the deepest reverence
            towards God and equality with God. Christ, when on earth,
            appeared full of holy reverence towards the Father. He paid
            the most reverential worship to him, praying to him with
            postures of reverence. Thus we read of his "kneeling down and
            praying," Luke 22:41. This became Christ, as one who had taken
            on him the human nature, but at the same time he existed in
            the divine nature; whereby his person was in all respects
            equal to the person of the Father. God the Father hath no
            attribute or perfection that the Son hath not, in equal
            degree, and equal glory. These things meet in no other person
            but Jesus Christ.
         4. There are conjoined in the person of Christ infinite
            worthiness of good, and the greatest patience under sufferings
            of evil.
            He was perfectly innocent,and deserved no suffering. He
            deserved nothing from God by any guilt of his own, and he
            deserved no ill from men. Yea, he was not only harmless and
            undeserving of suffering, but he was infinitely worthy; worthy
            of the infinite love of the Father, worthy of infinite and
            eternal happiness, and infinitely worthy of all possible
            esteem, love, and service from all men.
            And yet he was perfectly patient under the greatest sufferings
            that ever were endured in this world. Heb. 12:2. "He endured
            the cross, despising the shame." He suffered not from his
            Father for his faults, but ours; and he suffered from men not
            for his faults but for those things on account of which he was
            infinitely worthy of their love and honor, which made his
            patience the more wonderful and the more glorious. 1 Pet.
            2:20, "For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your
            faults, ye shall take it patiently, but if when ye do well.
            and suffer for it, ye take it patiently; this is acceptable
            with God. For even hereunto were ye called; because Christ
            also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should
            follow his steps: who did no sin, neither was guile found in
            his mouth: who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he
            suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that
            judgeth righteously: who his own self bare our sins in his own
            body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto
            righteousness: by whose stripes ye were healed." There is no
            such conjunction of innocence, worthiness, and patience under
            sufferings, as in the person of Christ.
         5. In the person of Christ are conjoined an exceeding spirit of
            obedience, with supreme dominion over heaven and earth.
            Christ is the Lord of all things in two respects: he is so, as
            God-man and Mediator, and thus his dominion is appointed, and
            given him of the Father. Having it by delegation from God, he
            is as it were the Father's vicegerent. But he is Lord of all
            things in another respect, namely, as he is (by his original
            nature) God; and so he is by natural right the Lord of all,
            and supreme over all as much as the Father. Thus, he has
            dominion over the world, not by delegation, but in his own
            right. He is not an under God, as the Arians suppose, but to
            all intents and purposes supreme God.
            And yet in the same person is found the greatest spirit of
            obedience to the commands and laws of God that ever was in the
            universe; which was manifest in his obedience here in this
            world. John 14:31 "As the Father gave me commandment, even so
            I do."-- John 15:10. "Even as I have kept my Father's
            commandments, and abide in his love." The greatness of his
            obedience appears in its perfection, and in his obeying
            commands of such exceeding difficulty. Never any one received
            commands from God of such difficulty, and that were so great a
            trial of obedience, as Jesus Christ. One of God's commands to
            him was, that he should yield himself to those dreadful
            sufferings that he underwent. See John 10:18. "No man taketh
            it from me, but I lay it down of myself." "This commandment
            received I of my Father." And Christ was thoroughly obedient
            to this command of God. Heb. 5:8. "Though he were a Son, yet
            he learned obedience by the things that he suffered." Philip.
            2:8. "He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even
            the death of the cross." Never was there such an instance of
            obedience in man or angel as this, though he was at the same
            time supreme Lord of both angels and men.
         6. In the person of Christ are conjoined absolute sovereignty and
            perfect resignation. This is another unparalleled conjunction.
            Christ, as he is God, is the absolute sovereign of the world,
            the sovereign disposer of all events. The decrees of God are
            all his sovereign decrees; and the work of creation, and all
            God's works of providence, are his sovereign works. It is he
            that worketh all things according to the counsel of his own
            will. Col 1:16f. "By him, and through him, and to him, are all
            things." John 5:17. "The Father worketh hitherto, and I work."
            Matt. 8:3. "I will, be thou clean."
            But yet Christ was the most wonderful instance of resignation
            that ever appeared in the world. He was absolutely and
            perfectly resigned when he had a near and immediate prospect
            of his terrible sufferings, and the dreadful cup that he was
            to drink. The idea and expectation of this made his soul
            exceeding sorrowful even unto death, and put him into such an
            agony, that his sweat was as it were great drops or clots of
            blood, falling down to the ground. But in such circumstances
            he was wholly resigned to the will of God. Matt 26:39. "O my
            Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me:
            nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt". Verse 42. "O
            my Father, if this cup may not pass from me, except I drink
            it, thy will be done."
         7. In Christ do meet together self-sufficiency, and an entire
            trust and reliance on God, which is another conjunction
            peculiar to the person of Christ.
            As he is a divine person, he is self-sufficient, standing in
            need of nothing. All creatures are dependent on him, but he is
            dependent on none, but is absolutely independent. His
            proceeding from the Father, in his eternal generation, argues
            no proper dependence on the will of the Father; for that
            proceeding was natural and necessary, and not arbitrary.
            But yet Christ entirely trusted in God: -- his enemies say
            that of him, "He trusted in God that he would deliver him,"
            Matt. 27:43. And the apostle testifies, I Pet. 2:23. "That he
            committed himself God."
       C) Such diverse excellencies are expressed in him towards men, that
       otherwise would have seemed impossible to be exercised towards the
       same object; as particularly these three, justice, mercy, and
       truth. The same that are mentioned in Psalm 85:10. "Mercy and truth
       are met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other."
       The strict justice of God, and even his revenging justice, and that
       against the sins of men, never was so gloriously manifested. as in
       Christ. He manifested an infinite regard to the attribute of God's
       justice, in that, when he had a mind to save sinners, he was
       willing to undergo such extreme sufferings, rather than that their
       salvation should be to the injury of the honor of that attribute.
       And as he is the Judge of the world, he doth himself exercise
       strict justice, he will not clear the guilty, nor at all acquit the
       wicked in judgment.
       Yet how wonderfully is infinite mercy towards sinners displayed in
       him! And what glorious and ineffable grace and love have been and
       are exercised by him, towards sinful men! Though he be the just
       Judge of a sinful world, yet he is also the Savior of the world.
       Though he be a consuming fire to sin, yet he is the light and life
       of sinners. Rom. 3:25f. "Whom God hath set forth to be a
       propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his
       righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
       forbearance of God; to declare, I say, at this time his
       righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him
       which believeth in Jesus."
       So the immutable truth of God, in the threatenings of his law
       against the sins of men, was never so manifested as it is in Jesus
       Christ, for there never was any other so great a trial of the
       unalterableness of the truth of God in those threatenings, as when
       sin came to be imputed to his own Son. And then in Christ has been
       seen already an actual complete accomplishment of those
       threatenings, which never has been nor will be seen in any other
       instance; because the eternity that will be taken up in fulfilling
       those threatenings on others, never will be finished. Christ
       manifested an infinite regard to this truth of God in his
       sufferings. And, in his judging the world, he makes the covenant of
       works, that contains those dreadful threatenings, his rule of
       judgement. He will see to it, that it is not infringed in the least
       jot or tittle: he will do nothing contrary to the threatenings of
       the law, and their complete fulfilment. And yet in him we have many
       great and precious promises, promises of perfect deliverance from
       the penalty of the law. And this is the promise that he hath
       promised us, even eternal life. And in him are all the promises of
       God yea, and Amen.
       Part Two Having thus shown wherein there is an admirable
       conjunction of excellencies in Jesus Christ, I now proceed,
       Secondly, To show how this admirable conjunction of excellencies
       appears in Christ's acts, [ namely:]
       A) in his taking of human nature,
       B) in his earthly life,
       C) in his sacrificial death,
       D) in his exaltation in heaven,
       E) in his final subduing of all evil when he returns in glory.]
       A) It appears in what Christ did in taking on him our nature.
       In this act, his infinite condescension wonderfully appeared, That
       he who was God should become man; that the word should be made
       flesh, and should take on him a nature infinitely below his
       original nature! And it appears yet more remarkably in the low
       circumstances of his incarnation: he was conceived in the womb of a
       poor young woman, whose poverty appeared in this, when she came to
       offer sacrifices of her purification, she brought what was allowed
       of in the law only in case of poverty, as Luke 2:24. "According to
       what Is said in the law of the Lord, a pair of turtle-doves, or two
       young pigeons." This was allowed only in case the person was so
       poor that she was not able to offer a lamb. Lev. 12:8.
       And though his infinite condescension thus appeared in the manner
       of his incarnation, yet his divine dignity also appeared in it; for
       though he was conceived in the womb of a poor virgin, yet he was
       conceived there by the power of the Holy Ghost. And his divine
       dignity also appeared in the holiness of his conception and birth.
       Though he was conceived in the womb of one of the corrupt race of
       mankind, yet he was conceived and born without sin; as the angel
       said to the blessed Virgin, Luke 1:35. "The Holy Ghost shall come
       upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee,
       therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall
       be called the Son of God."
       His infinite condescension marvelously appeared in the manner of
       his birth. He was brought forth in a stable because there was no
       room for them in the inn. The inn was taken up by others, that were
       looked upon as persons of greater account. The Blessed Virgin,
       being poor and despised, was turned or shut out. Though she was in
       such necessitous circumstances, yet those that counted themselves
       her betters would not give place to her; and therefore, in the time
       of her travail, she was forced to betake herself to a stable; and
       when the child was born, it was wrapped in swaddling clothes, and
       laid in a manger. There Christ lay a little infant, and there he
       eminently appeared as a lamb.
       But yet this feeble infant, born thus in a stable, and laid in a
       manger, was born to conquer and triumph over Satan, that roaring
       lion. He came to subdue the mighty powers of darkness, and make a
       show of them openly, and so to restore peace on earth, and to
       manifest God's good-will towards men, and to bring glory to God in
       the highest, according as the end of his birth was declared by the
       joyful songs of the glorious hosts of angels appearing to the
       shepherds at the same time that the infant lay in the manger;
       whereby his divine dignity was manifested.
       B) This admirable conjunction of excellencies appears in the acts
       and various passages of Christ's life.
       Though Christ dwelt in mean outward circumstances, whereby his
       condescension and humility especially appeared, and his majesty was
       veiled; yet his divine divinity and glory did in many of his acts
       shine through the veil, and it illustriously appeared, that he was
       not only the Son of man, but the great God.
       Thus, in the circumstances of his infancy, his outward meanness
       appeared; yet there was something then to show forth his divine
       dignity, in the wise men's being stirred up to come from the east
       to give honor to him their being led by a miraculous star, and
       coming and falling down and worshipping him, and presenting him
       with gold, frankincense, and myrrh. His humility and meekness
       wonderfully appeared in his subjection to his mother and reputed
       father when he was a child. Herein he appeared as a lamb. But his
       divine glory broke forth and shone when, at twelve years old, he
       disputed with doctors in the temple. In that he appeared, in some
       measure, as the Lion of the tribe of Judah.
       And so, after he entered on his public ministry, his marvellous
       humility and meekness was manifested in his choosing to appear in
       such mean outward circumstances; and in being contented in them,
       when he was so poor that he had not where to lay his head, and
       depended on the charity of some of his followers for his
       subsistence, as appears by Luke 8. at the beginning. How meek,
       condescending, and familiar his treatment of his disciples; his
       discourses with them, treating them as a father his children, yea,
       as friends and companions. How patient, bearing such affliction and
       reproach, and so many injuries from the scribes and Pharisees, and
       others. In these things he appeared as a Lamb.
       And yet he at the same time did in many ways show forth his divine
       majesty and glory, particularly in the miracles he wrought, which
       were evidently divine works, and manifested omnipotent power, and
       so declared him to be the Lion of the tribe of Judah. His wonderful
       and miraculous works plainly showed him to be the God of nature; in
       that it appeared by them that he had all nature in his hands, and
       could lay an arrest upon it, and stop and change its course as he
       pleased. In healing the sick, and opening the eyes of the blind,
       and unstopping the ears of the deaf, and healing the lame, he
       showed that he was the God that framed the eye, and created the
       ear, and was the author of the frame of man's body. By the dead's
       rising at his command, it appeared that he was the author and
       fountain of life, and that "God the Lord, to whom belong the issues
       from death." By his walking on the sea in a storm, when the waves
       were raised, he showed himself to be that God spoken of in Job 9:8.
       "That treadeth on the waves of the sea." By his stilling the storm,
       and calming the rage of the sea, by his powerful command, saying,
       "Peace, be still," he showed that he has the command of the
       universe, and that he is that God who brings things to pass by the
       word of his power, who speaks and it is done, who commands and it
       stands fast; Psalm 115:7. "Who stilleth the noise of the seas, the
       noise of their waves." And Psalm 107:29. "That maketh the storm a
       calm, so that the waves thereof are still." And Psalm 139:8f. "O
       Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee, or to thy
       faithfulness round about thee? Thou rulest the raging of the sea:
       when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest them." Christ, by
       casting out devils, remarkably appeared as the Lion of the tribe of
       Judah, and showed that he was stronger than the roaring lion, that
       seizes whom he may devour. He commanded them to come out, and they
       were forced to obey. They were terribly afraid of him; they fall
       down before him, and beseech him not so torment them. He forces a
       whole legion of them to forsake their hold, by his powerful word;
       and they could not so much as enter into the swine without his
       leave. He showed the glory of his omniscience, by telling the
       thoughts of men; as we have often an account. Herein he appeared to
       be that God spoken of, Amos 4:13. "That declareth unto man what is
       his thought." Thus, in the midst of his meanness and humiliation,
       his divine glory appeared in his miracles, John 2:11. "This
       beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested
       forth his glory."
       And though Christ ordinarily appeared without outward glory, and in
       great obscurity, yet at a certain time he threw off the veil, and
       appeared in his divine majesty, so far as it could be outwardly
       manifested to men in this frail state, when he was transfigured in
       the mount. The apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1:16,17. was an "eye-witness
       of his majesty, when he received from God the Father honor and
       glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent
       glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; which
       voice that came from heaven they heard, when they were with him in
       the holy mount."
       And at the same time that Christ was wont to appear in such
       meekness, condescension, and humility, in his familiar discourses
       with his disciples, appearing therein as the Lamb of God; he was
       also wont to appear as The Lion of the tribe of Judah, with divine
       authority and majesty, in his so sharply rebuking the scribes and
       Pharisees, and other hypocrites.
       C) This admirable conjunction of excellencies remarkably appears in
       his offering up himself a sacrifice for sinners in his last
       sufferings.
       As this was the greatest thing in all the works of redemption, the
       greatest act of Christ in that work; so in this act especially does
       there appear that admirable conjunction of excellencies that has
       been spoken of. Christ never so much appeared as a lamb, as when he
       was slain: "He came like a lamb to the slaughter," Isaiah 53:7.
       Then he was offered up to God as a lamb without blemish, and
       without spot: then especially did he appear to be the anti-type of
       the lamb of the passover: 1 Cor 5:7. "Christ our Passover
       sacrificed for us." And yet in that act he did in an especial
       manner appear as the Lion of the tribe of Judah; yea, in this above
       all other acts, in many respects, as may appear in the following
       things.
         1. Then was Christ in the greatest degree of his humiliation, and
            yet by that, above all other things, his divine glory appears.
            Christ's humiliation was great, in being born in such a low
            condition, of a poor virgin, and in a stable. His humiliation
            was great, in being subject to Joseph the carpenter, and Mary
            his mother, and afterwards living in poverty, so as not to
            have where to lay his head; and in suffering such manifold and
            bitter reproaches as he suffered, while he went about
            preaching and working miracles. But his humiliation was never
            so great as it was, in his last sufferings, beginning with his
            agony in the garden, till he expired on the cross. Never was
            he subject to such ignominy as then, never did he suffer so
            much pain in his body, or so much sorrow in his soul; never
            was he in so great an exercise of his condescension, humility,
            meekness, and patience, as he was in these last sufferings;
            never was his divine glory and majesty covered with so thick
            and dark a veil; never did he so empty himself and make
            himself of no reputation, as at this time.
            And yet, never was his divine glory so manifested, by any act
            of his, as in yielding himself up to these sufferings. When
            the fruit of it came to appear, and the mystery and ends of it
            to be unfolded in its issue, then did the glory of it appear,
            then did it appear as the most glorious act of Christ that
            ever he exercised towards the creature. This act of his is
            celebrated by the angels and hosts of heaven with peculiar
            praises, as that which is above all others glorious, as you
            may see in the context, (Revelation 5:9-12) "And they sang a
            new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to
            open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain and hast redeemed
            us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
            people, and nation; and hast made us unto our God kings and
            priests: and we shall reign on the earth. And I beheld, and I
            heard the voice of many angels round about the throne, and the
            beasts, and the elders: and the number of them was ten
            thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands,
            saying with a loud voice Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to
            receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
            honor, and glory, and blessing."
         2. He never in any act gave so great a manifestation of love to
            God, and yet never so manifested his love to those that were
            enemies to God, as in that act.
            Christ never did any thing whereby his love to the Father was
            so eminently manifested, as in his laying down his life, under
            such inexpressible sufferings, in obedience to his command and
            for the vindication of the honor of his authority and majesty;
            nor did ever any mere creature give such a testimony of love
            to God as that was.
            And yet this was the greatest expression of his love to sinful
            men who were enemies to God; Rom. 5:10. "When we were enemies,
            we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son." The
            greatness of Christ's love to such, appears in nothing so much
            as in its being dying love. That blood of Christ which fell in
            great drops to the ground, in his agony, was shed from love to
            God's enemies, and his own. That shame and spitting, that
            torment of body, and that exceeding sorrow, even unto death,
            which he endured in his soul, was what he underwent from love
            to rebels against God to save them from hell, and to purchase
            for them eternal glory. Never did Christ so eminently show his
            regard to God's honor, as in offering up himself a victim to
            Justice. And yet in this above all, he manifested his love to
            them who dishonored God, so as to bring such guilt on
            themselves, that nothing less than his blood could atone for
            it.
         3. Christ never so eminently appeared for divine justice, and yet
            never suffered so much from divine Justice, as when he offered
            up himself a sacrifice for our sins.
            In Christ's great sufferings did his infinite regard to the
            honor of God's justice distinguishingly appear, for it was
            from regard to that that he thus humbled himself.
            And yet in these sufferings, Christ was the target of the
            vindictive expressions of that very justice of God. Revenging
            justice then spent all its force upon him, on account of our
            guilt; which made him sweat blood, and cry out upon the cross,
            and probably rent his vitals--broke his heart, the fountain of
            blood, or some other blood vessels--and by the violent
            fermentation turned his blood to water. For the blood and
            water that issued out of his side, when pierced by the spear,
            seems to have been extravasated blood, and so there might be a
            kind of literal fulfilment of Psalm 22:14. "I am poured out
            like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart is
            like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels." And this
            was the way and means by which Christ stood up for the honor
            of God's justice, namely, by thus suffering its terrible
            executions. For when he had undertaken for sinners, and had
            substituted himself in their room, divine justice could have
            its due honor no other way than by his suffering its revenges.
            In this the diverse excellencies that met in the person of
            Christ appeared, namely, his infinite regard to God's justice,
            and such love to those that have exposed themselves to it, as
            induced him thus to yield himself a sacrifice to it.
         4. Christ's holiness never so illustriously shone forth as it did
            in his last sufferings, and yet he never was to such a degree
            treated as guilty.
            Christ's holiness never had such a trial as it had then, and
            therefore never had so great a manifestation. When it was
            tried in this furnace it came forth as gold, or as silver
            purified seven times. His holiness then above all appeared in
            his steadfast pursuit of the honor of God, and in his
            obedience to him. For his yielding himself unto death was
            transcendently the greatest act of obedience that ever was
            paid to God by any one since the foundation of the world.
            And yet then Christ was in the greatest degree treated as a
            wicked person would have been. He was apprehended and bound as
            a malefactor. His accusers represented him as a most wicked
            wretch. In his sufferings before his crucifixion, he was
            treated as if he had been the worst and vilest of mankind, and
            then, he was put to a kind of death, that none but the worst
            sort of malefactors were wont to suffer, those that were most
            abject in their persons, and guilty of the blackest crimes.
            And he suffered as though guilty from God himself, by reason
            of our guilt imputed to him; for he who knew no sin, was made
            sin for us; he was made subject to wrath, as if he had been
            sinful himself. He was made a curse for us.
            Christ never so greatly manifested his hatred of sin, as
            against God, as in his dying to take away the dishonor that
            sin had done to God; and yet never was he to such a degree
            subject to the terrible effects of God's hatred of sin, and
            wrath against it, as he was then. in this appears those
            diverse excellencies meeting in Christ, namely, love to God,
            and grace to sinners.
         5. He never was so dealt with, as unworthy, as in his last
            sufferings, and yet it is chiefly on account of them that he
            is accounted worthy.
            He was therein dealt with as if he had not been worthy to
            live: they cry out, "Away with him! away with him! Crucify
            him." John 19:15. And they prefer Barabbas before him. And he
            suffered from the Father, as one whose demerits were infinite,
            by reason of our demerits that were laid upon him.
            And yet it was especially by that act of his subjecting
            himself to those sufferings that he merited, and on the
            account of which chiefly he was accounted worthy of the glory
            of his exaltation. Philip. 2:8, 9. "He humbled himself, and
            became obedient unto death; wherefore God hath highly exalted
            him." And we see that it is on this account chiefly, that he
            is extolled as worthy by saints and angels in the context:
            "Worthy," say they, "is the Lamb that was slain." This shows
            an admirable conjunction in him of infinite dignity, and
            infinite condescension and love to the infinitely unworthy.
         6. Christ in his last sufferings suffered most extremely from
            those towards whom he was then manifesting his greatest act of
            love.
            He never suffered so much from his Father, (though not from
            any hatred to him, but from hatred to our sins,) for he then
            forsook him, or took away the comforts of his presence; and
            then "it pleased the Lord to bruise him, and put him to
            grief." as Isaiah 53:10. And yet he never gave so great a
            manifestation of love to God as then, as has been already
            observed.
            So Christ never suffered so much from the hands of men as he
            did then; and yet never was in so high an exercise of love to
            men. He never was so ill treated by his disciples; who were so
            unconcerned about his sufferings, that they .would not watch
            with him one hour, in his agony; and when he was apprehended,
            all forsook him and fled, except Peter, who denied him with
            oaths and curses. And yet then he was suffering, shedding his
            blood, and pouring out his soul unto death for them. Yea, he
            probably was then shedding his blood for some of them that
            shed his blood, for whom he prayed while they were crucifying
            him; and who were probably afterwards brought home to Christ
            by Peter's preaching. (Compare Luke 23:34. Acts 2:23,36,37,41.
            and chap. 3:17. and chap. 4.) This shows an admirable meeting
            of justice and grace in the redemption of Christ.
         7. It was in Christ's last sufferings, above all, that he was
            delivered up to the power of his enemies; and yet by these,
            above all, he obtained victory over his enemies.
            Christ never was so in his enemies' hands, as in the time of
            his last sufferings. They sought his life before; but from
            time to time they were restrained, and Christ escaped out of
            their hands, and this reason is given for it, that his time
            was not yet come. But now they were suffered to work their
            will upon him, he was in a great degree delivered up to the
            malice and cruelty of both wicked men and devils. And
            therefore when Christ's enemies came to apprehend him, he says
            to them, Luke 22:53. "When I was daily with you in the temple
            ye stretched forth no hand against me: but this is your hour,
            and the power of darkness."
            And yet it was principally by means of those sufferings that
            he conquered and overthrew his enemies. Christ never so
            effectually bruised Satan's head, as when Satan bruised his
            heel. The weapon with which Christ warred against the devil,
            and obtained a most complete victory and glorious triumph over
            him, was the cross, the instrument and weapon with which he
            thought he had overthrown Christ, and brought on him shameful
            destruction. Col. 2:14,15. "Blotting out the handwriting of
            ordinances,--nailing it to his cross: and having spoiled
            principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly,
            triumphing over them in it." In his last sufferings, Christ
            sapped the very foundations of Satan's kingdom, he conquered
            his enemies in their own territories, and beat them with their
            own weapons as David cut off Goliath's head with his own
            sword. The devil had, as it were, swallowed up Christ, as the
            whale did Jonah-- but it was deadly poison to him, he gave him
            a mortal wound in his own bowels. He was soon sick of his
            morsel, and was forced to do by him as the whale did by Jonah.
            To this day he is heart-sick of what he then swallowed as his
            prey. In those sufferings of Christ was laid the foundation of
            all that glorious victory he has already obtained over Satan,
            in the overthrow of his heathenish kingdom in the Roman
            empire, and all the success the gospel has had since; and also
            of all his future and still more glorious victory that is to
            be obtained in the earth. Thus Samson's riddle is most
            eminently fulfilled, Judges 14:14. "Out of the eater came
            forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness." And
            thus the true Samson does more towards the destruction of his
            enemies at his death than in his life, in yielding up himself
            to death, he pulls down the temple of Dagon, and destroys many
            thousands of his enemies, even while they are making
            themselves sport in his sufferings--and so he whose type was
            the ark, pulls down Dagon, and breaks off his head and hands
            in his own temple, even while he is brought in there as
            Dagon's captive. (1 Samuel 5:1-4)
            Thus Christ appeared at the same time, and in the same act, as
            both a lion and a lamb. He appeared as a lamb in the hands of
            his cruel enemies; as a lamb in the paws, and between the
            devouring jaws, of a roaring lion; yea, he was a lamb actually
            slain by this lion: and yet at the same time, as the Lion of
            the tribe of Judah, he conquers and triumphs over Satan;
            destroying his own destroyer; as Samson did the lion that
            roared upon him, when he rent him as he would a kid. And in
            nothing has Christ appeared so much as a lion, in glorious
            strength destroying his enemies, as when he was brought as a
            lamb to the slaughter. In his greatest weakness he was most
            strong; and when he suffered most from his enemies, he brought
            the greatest confusion on his enemies.
            Thus this admirable conjunction of diverse excellencies was
            manifest in Christ, in his offering up himself to God in his
            last sufferings.
            D) It is still manifest in his acts, in his present state of
            exaltation in heaven. Indeed, in his exalted state, he most
            eminently appears in manifestation of those excellencies, on
            the account of which he is compared to a lion; but still he
            appears as a lamb; Rev. 14:1. "And I looked, and lo, a Lamb
            stood on mount Sion"; as in his state of humiliation he
            chiefly appeared as a lamb, and yet did not appear without
            manifestation of his divine majesty and power, as the Lion of
            the tribe of Judah. Though Christ be now at the right-hand of
            God, exalted as King of heaven, and Lord of the universe; yet
            as he still is in the human nature, he still excels in
            humility. Though the man Christ Jesus be the highest of all
            creatures in heaven, yet he as much excels them all in
            humility as he doth in glory and dignity, for none sees so
            much of the distance between God and him as he does. And
            though he now appears in such glorious majesty and dominion in
            heaven, yet he appears as a lamb in his condescending, mild,
            and sweet treatment of his saints there, for he is a Lamb
            still, even amidst the throne of his exaltation, and he that
            is the Shepherd of the whole flock is himself a Lamb, and goes
            before them in heaven as such. Rev. 7:17. "For the Lamb, which
            is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead
            them unto living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away
            all tears from their eyes." Though in heaven every knee bows
            to him, and though the angels fall down before him adoring
            him, yet he treats his saints with infinite condescension,
            mildness, and endearment. And in his acts towards the saints
            on earth, he still appears as a lamb, manifesting exceeding
            love and tenderness in his intercession for them, as one that
            has had experience of affliction and temptation. He has not
            forgot what these things are, nor has he forgot how to pity
            those that are subject to them. And he still manifests his
            lamb-like excellencies, in his dealings with his saints on
            earth, in admirable forbearance, love, gentleness, and
            compassion. Behold him instructing, supplying, supporting, and
            comforting them; often coming to them, and manifesting himself
            to them by his Spirit, that he may sup with them, and they
            with him. Behold him admitting them to sweet communion,
            enabling them with boldness and confidence to come to him, and
            solacing their hearts. And in heaven Christ still appears, as
            it were, with the marks of his wounds upon him, and so appears
            as a Lamb as it had been slain, as he was represented in
            vision to St John, in the text, when he appeared to open the
            book sealed with seven seals, which is part of the glory of
            his exaltation.
            E) And lastly, this admirable conjunction of excellencies will
            be manifest in Christ's acts at the last judgement.
            He then, above all other times, will appear as the Lion of the
            tribe of Judah in infinite greatness and majesty, when he
            shall come in the glory of his Father, with all the holy
            angels, and the earth shall tremble before him, and the hills
            shall melt. This is he (Rev. 20:11.) "that shall sit on a
            great white throne, before whose face the earth and heaven
            shall flee away." He will then appear in the most dreadful and
            amazing manner to the wicked. The devils tremble at the
            thought of that appearance, and when it shall be, the kings,
            and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains.
            and the mighty men, and every bond-man and every free-man,
            shall hide themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the
            mountains, and shall cry to the mountains and rocks to fall on
            them, to hide them from the face and wrath of the Lamb. And
            none can declare or conceive of the amazing manifestations of
            wrath in which he will then appear towards these, or the
            trembling and astonishment the shrieking and gnashing of
            teeth, with which they shall stand before his judgment-seat,
            and receive the terrible sentence of his wrath.
            And yet he will at the same time appear as a Lamb to his
            saints; he will receive them as friends and brethren, treating
            them with infinite mildness and love. There shall be nothing
            in him terrible to them, but towards them he will clothe
            himself wholly with sweetness and endearment. The church shall
            be then admitted to him as his bride; that shall be her
            wedding-day. The saints shall all be sweetly invited to come
            with him to inherit the kingdom, and reign in it with him to
            all eternity.
            Part Three [I would now show how the aforesaid teaching is of
            benefit to us, in that
            A) it gives us insight into the names of Christ in Scripture,
            B) it encourages us to accept him as our Savior,
            C) it encourages us to accept him as our Friend.]
            A) From this doctrine we may learn one reason why Christ is
            called by such a variety of names, and held forth under such a
            variety of representations, in Scripture. It is the better to
            signify and exhibit to us that variety of excellencies that
            meet together and are conjoined in him. Many appellations are
            mentioned together in one verse Isaiah 9:6. "For unto us a
            Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government
            shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called
            Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father,
            the Prince of Peace." It shows a wonderful conjunction of
            excellencies, that the same person should be a Son, born and
            given, and yet be the everlasting Father, without beginning or
            end, that he should be a Child, and yet be he whose name is
            Counsellor, and the mighty God; and well may his name, in whom
            such things are conjoined, be called wonderful.
            By reason of the same wonderful conjunction, Christ is
            represented by a great variety of sensible things, that are on
            some account excellent. Thus in some places he is called a
            Sun, as Mal. 4:2, in others a Star, Numb. 24:17. And he is
            especially represented by the Morning star, as being that
            which excels all other stars in brightness, and is the
            forerunner of the day, Rev. 22:16. And, as in our text, he is
            compared to a lion in one verse, and a lamb in the next, so
            sometimes he is compared to a roe or young hart, another
            creature most diverse from a lion. So in some places he is
            called a rock, in others he is compared to a pearl. In some
            places he is called a man of war, and the Captain of our
            Salvation, in other places he is represented as a bridegroom.
            In the second chapter of Canticles, the first verse, he is
            compared to a rose and a lily, that are sweet and beautiful
            flowers; in the next verse but one, he is compared to a tree
            bearing sweet fruit. In Isaiah 53:2 he is called a Root out of
            a dry ground; but elsewhere, instead of that, he is called the
            Tree of Life, that grows (not in a dry or barren ground, but)
            "in the midst of the paradise of God." Rev. 2:7.
            B) Let the consideration of this wonderful meeting of diverse
            excellencies in Christ induce you to accept of him, and close
            with him as your Savior. As all manner of excellencies meet in
            him, so there are concurring in him all manner of arguments
            and motives, to move you to choose him for your Savior, and
            every thing that tends to encourage poor sinners to come and
            put their trust in him: his fullness and all-sufficiency as a
            Savior gloriously appear in that variety of excellencies that
            has been spoken of.
            Fallen man is in a state of exceeding great misery, and is
            helpless in it; he is a poor weak creature, like an infant
            cast out in its blood in the day that it is born. But Christ
            is the lion of the tribe of Judah; he is strong, though we are
            weak; he hath prevailed to do that for us which no creature
            else could do. Fallen man is a mean despicable creature, a
            contemptible worm; but Christ, who has undertaken for us, is
            infinitely honorable and worthy. Fallen man is polluted, but
            Christ is infinitely holy; fallen man is hateful, but Christ
            is infinitely lovely; fallen man is the object of God's
            indignation, but Christ is infinitely dear to him. We have
            dreadfully provoked God, but Christ has performed that
            righteousness which is infinitely precious in God's eyes.
            And here is not only infinite strength and infinite
            worthiness, but infinite condescension, and love and mercy, as
            great as power and dignity. If you are a poor, distressed
            sinner, whose heart is ready to sink for fear that God never
            will have mercy on you, you need not be afraid to go to
            Christ, for fear that he is either unable or unwilling to help
            you. Here is a strong foundation, and an inexhaustible
            treasure, to answer the necessities of your poor soul, and
            here is infinite grace and gentleness to invite and embolden a
            poor, unworthy, fearful soul to come to it. If Christ accepts
            of you, you need not fear but that you will be safe, for he is
            a strong Lion for your defense. And if you come, you need not
            fear but that you shall be accepted; for he is like a Lamb to
            all that come to him, and receives then with infinite grace
            and tenderness. It is true he has awful majesty, he is the
            great God, and infinitely high above you; but there is this to
            encourage and embolden the poor sinner, that Christ is man as
            well as God; he is a creature, as well as the Creator, and he
            is the most humble and lowly in heart of any creature in
            heaven or earth. This may well make the poor unworthy creature
            bold in coming to him. You need not hesitate one moment; but
            may run to him, and cast yourself upon him. You will certainly
            be graciously and meekly received by him. Though he is a lion,
            he will only be a lion to your enemies, but he will be a lamb
            to you. It could not have been conceived, had it not been so
            in the person of Christ, that there could have been so much in
            any Savior, that is inviting and tending to encourage sinners
            to trust in him. Whatever your circumstances are, you need not
            be afraid to come to such a Savior as this. Be you never so
            wicked a creature, here is worthiness enough; be you never so
            poor, and mean, and ignorant a creature, there is no danger of
            being despised, for though he be so much greater than you, he
            is also immensely more humble than you. Any one of you that is
            a father or mother, will not despise one of your own children
            that comes to you in distress: much less danger is there of
            Christ's despising you, if you in your heart come to him.
            Here let me a little expostulate with the poor, burdened,
            distressed soul.
              1. What are you afraid of, that you dare not venture your
                 soul upon Christ? Are you afraid that he cannot save you,
                 that he is not strong enough to conquer the enemies of
                 your soul? But how can you desire one stronger than "the
                 almighty God"? as Christ is called, Isa. 9:6. Is there
                 need of greater than infinite strength? Are you afraid
                 that he will not be willing to stoop so low as to take
                 any gracious notice of you? But then, look on him, as he
                 stood in the ring of soldiers, exposing his blessed face
                 to be buffeted and spit upon by them! Behold him bound
                 with his back uncovered to those that smote him! And
                 behold him hanging on the cross! Do you think that he
                 that had condescension enough to stoop to these things,
                 and that for his crucifiers, will be unwilling to accept
                 of you, if you come to him? Or, are you afraid that if he
                 does accept you, that God the Father will not accept of
                 him for you? But consider, will God reject his own Son,
                 in whom his infinite delight is, and has been, from all
                 eternity, and who is so united to him, that if he should
                 reject him he would reject himself?
              2. What is there that you can desire should be in a Savior,
                 that is not in Christ? Or, wherein should you desire a
                 Savior should be otherwise than Christ is? What
                 excellency is there wanting? What is there that is great
                 or good; what is there that is venerable or winning; what
                 is there that is adorable or endearing; or, what can you
                 think of that would be encouraging, which is not to be
                 found in the person of Christ? Would you have your Savior
                 to be great and honorable, because you are not willing to
                 be beholden to a mean person? And, is not Christ a person
                 honorable enough to be worthy that you should be
                 dependent on him? Is he not a person high enough to be
                 appointed to so honorable a work as your salvation? Would
                 you not only have a Savior of high degree, but would you
                 have him, notwithstanding his exaltation and dignity, to
                 be made also of low degree, that he might have experience
                 of afflictions and trials, that he might learn by the
                 things that he has suffered, to pity them that suffer and
                 are tempted? And has not Christ been made low enough for
                 you? and has he not suffered enough? Would you not only
                 have him possess experience of the afflictions you now
                 suffer, but also of that amazing wrath that you fear
                 hereafter, that he may know how to pity those that are in
                 danger, and afraid of it? This Christ has had experience
                 of, which experience gave him a greater sense of it, a
                 thousand times, than you have, or any man living has.
                 Would you have your Savior to be one who is near to God,
                 that so his mediation might be prevalent with him? And
                 can you desire him to be nearer to God than Christ is,
                 who is his only-begotten Son, of the same essence with
                 the Father? And would you not only have him near to God,
                 but also near to you, that you may have free access to
                 him? And would you have him nearer to you than to be in
                 the same nature, united to you by a spiritual union, so
                 close as to be fitly represented by the union of the wife
                 to the husband, of the branch to the vine, of the member
                 to the head; yea, so as to be one spirit? For so he will
                 be united to you, if you accept of him. Would you have a
                 Savior that has given some great and extraordinary
                 testimony of mercy and love to sinners, by something that
                 he has done, as well as by what he says? And can you
                 think or conceive of greater things than Christ has done?
                 Was it not a great thing for him, who was God, to take
                 upon him human nature: to be not only God, but man
                 thenceforward to all eternity? But would you look upon
                 suffering for sinners to be a yet greater testimony of
                 love to sinners, than merely doing, though it be ever so
                 extraordinary a thing that he has done? And would you
                 desire that a Savior should suffer more than Christ has
                 suffered for sinners? What is there wanting, or what
                 would you add if you could, to make him more fit to be
                 your Savior?
            But further, to induce you to accept of Christ as your Savior,
            consider two things particularly.
              1. How much Christ appears as the Lamb of God in his
                 invitations to you to come to him and trust in him. With
                 what sweet grace and kindness does he, from time to time,
                 call and invite you, as Prov. 8:4. "Unto you, O men, I
                 call, and my voice is to the sons of men." And Isaiah
                 55:1-3 "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the
                 waters, and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat--
                 yea come, buy wine and milk without money, and without
                 price." How gracious is he here in inviting every one
                 that thirsts, and in so repeating his invitation over and
                 over, "Come ye to the waters, come, buy and eat - - yea
                 come!" Mark the excellency of that entertainment which he
                 invites you to accept of; "Come, buy wine and milk!" your
                 poverty, having nothing to pay for it, shall be no
                 objection, "Come, he that hath no money, come without
                 money, and without price!" What gracious arguments and
                 expostulations he uses with you! "Wherefore do ye spend
                 money for that which is not bread? and your labor for
                 that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently unto me,
                 and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight
                 itself in fatness." As much as to say, It is altogether
                 needless for you to continue laboring and toiling for
                 that which can never serve your turn, seeking rest in the
                 world, and in your own righteousness -- I have made
                 abundant provision for you, of that which is really good,
                 and will fully satisfy your desires, and answer your end,
                 and I stand ready to accept of you: you need not be
                 afraid; If you will come to me, I will engage to see all
                 your wants supplied, and you made a happy creature. As he
                 promises in the third verse, "Incline your ear, and come
                 unto me: Hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make
                 an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies
                 of David." And so Prov. 9 at the beginning. How gracious
                 and sweet is the invitation there! "Whoso is simple, let
                 him turn in hither;" let you be never so poor, ignorant,
                 and blind a creature, you shall be welcome. And in the
                 following words Christ sets forth the provision that he
                 has made for you, "Come, eat of my bread, and drink of
                 the wine which I have mingled." You are in a poor
                 famishing state, and have nothing wherewith to feed your
                 perishing soul; you have been seeking something, but yet
                 remain destitute. Hearken, how Christ calls you to eat of
                 his bread, and to drink of the wine that he hath mingled!
                 And how much like a lamb does Christ appear in Matt. 9:28
                 30. "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
                 and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and
                 learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye
                 shall find rest to your souls. For my yoke is easy, and
                 my burden is light." O thou poor distressed soul! whoever
                 thou art, consider that Christ mentions thy very case
                 when he calls to them who labor and are heavy laden! How
                 he repeatedly promises you rest if you come to him! In
                 the 28th verse he says, "I will give you rest." And in
                 the 29th verse, "Ye shall find rest to your souls." This
                 is what you want. This is the thing you have been so long
                 in vain seeking after. O how sweet would rest be to you,
                 if you could but obtain it! Come to Christ, and you shall
                 obtain it. And hear how Christ, to encourage you,
                 represents himself as a lamb! He tells you, that he is
                 meek and lowly in heart, and are you afraid to come to
                 such a one! And again, Rev. 3:20. "Behold, I stand at the
                 door and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the
                 door, I will come in to him, and I will sup with him and
                 he with me." Christ condescends not only to call you to
                 him, but he comes to you; he comes to your door, and
                 there knocks. He might send an officer and seize you as a
                 rebel and vile malefactor, but instead of that, he comes
                 and knocks at your door, and seeks that you would receive
                 him into your house, as your Friend and Savior. And he
                 not only knocks at your door, but he stands there
                 waiting, while you are backward and unwilling. And not
                 only so, but he makes promises what he will do for you,
                 if you will admit him, what privileges he will admit you
                 to; he will sup with you, and you with him. And again,
                 Rev. 22:16,17. "I am the root and the offspring of David,
                 and the bright and morning star. And the Spirit and the
                 bride say, Come. And let him that heareth, say, Come. And
                 let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will let him
                 take of the water of life freely." How does Christ here
                 graciously set before you his own winning attractive
                 excellency! And how does he condescend to declare to you
                 not only his own invitation, but the invitation of the
                 Spirit and the bride, if by any means he might encourage
                 you to come! And how does he invite every one that will,
                 that they may "take of the water of life freely," that
                 they may take it as a free gift, however precious it be,
                 and though it be the Water of life.
              2. If you do come to Christ, he will appear as a Lion, in
                 his glorious power and dominion, to defend you. All those
                 excellencies of his, in which he appears as a lion, shall
                 be yours, and shall be employed for you in your defense,
                 for your safety, and to promote your glory, he will be as
                 a lion to fight against your enemies. He that touches
                 you, or offends you, will provoke his wrath, as he that
                 stirs up a lion. Unless your enemies can conquer this
                 Lion, they shall not be able to destroy or hurt you;
                 unless they are stronger than he, they shall not be able
                 to hinder your happiness. Isaiah 31:4. "For thus hath the
                 Lord spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the young lion
                 roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is
                 called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their
                 voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them; so shall
                 the Lord of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and
                 for the hill thereof."
            C) Let what has been said be improved to induce you to love
            the Lord Jesus Christ, and choose him for your friend and
            portion. As there is such an admirable meeting of diverse
            excellencies in Christ, so there is every thing in him to
            render him worthy of your love and choice, and to win and
            engage it. Whatsoever there is or can be desirable in a
            friend, is in Christ, and that to the highest degree that can
            be desired.
            Would you choose for a friend a person of great dignity? It is
            a thing taking with men to have those for their friends who
            are much above them; because they look upon themselves honored
            by the friendship of such. Thus, how taking would it be with
            an inferior maid to be the object of the dear love of some
            great and excellent prince. But Christ is infinitely above
            you, and above all the princes of the earth; for he is the
            King of kings. So honorable a person as this offers himself to
            you, in the nearest and dearest friendship.
            And would you choose to have a friend not only great but good?
            In Christ infinite greatness and infinite goodness meet
            together, and receive lustre and glory one from another. His
            greatness is rendered lovely by his goodness. The greater any
            one is without goodness, so much the greater evil; but when
            infinite goodness is joined with greatness, it renders it a
            glorious and adorable greatness. So, on the other hand, his
            infinite goodness receives lustre from his greatness. He that
            is of great understanding and ability, and is withal of a good
            and excellent disposition, is deservedly more esteemed than a
            lower and lesser being with the same kind inclination and good
            will. Indeed goodness is excellent in whatever subject it be
            found; it is beauty and excellency itself, and renders all
            excellent that are possessed of it; and yet most excellent
            when joined with greatness. The very same excellent qualities
            of gold render the body in which they are inherent more
            precious, and of greater value, when joined with greater than
            when with lesser dimensions. And how glorious is the sight, to
            see him who is the great Creator and supreme Lord of heaven
            and earth, full of condescension, tender pity and mercy,
            towards the mean and unworthy! His almighty power, and
            infinite majesty and self-sufficiency, render his exceeding
            love and grace the more surprising And how do his
            condescension and compassion endear his majesty, power, and
            dominion, and render those attributes pleasant, that would
            otherwise be only terrible! Would you not desire that your
            friend, though great and honorable, should be of such
            condescension and grace, and so to have the way opened to free
            access to him, that his exaltation above you might not hinder
            your free enjoyment of his friendship? -- And would you choose
            not only that the infinite greatness and majesty of your
            friend should be, as it were, mollified and sweetened with
            condescension and grace; but would you also desire to have
            your friend brought nearer to you? Would you choose a friend
            far above you, and yet as it were upon a level with you too?
            Though it be taking with men to have a near and dear friend of
            superior dignity, yet there is also an inclination in them to
            have their friend a sharer with them in circumstances. Thus is
            Christ. Though he be the great God, yet he has, as it were,
            brought himself down to be upon a level with you, so as to
            become man as you are that he might not only be your Lord, but
            your brother, and that he might be the more fit to be a
            companion for such a worm of the dust. This is one end of
            Christ's taking upon him man's nature, that his people might
            be under advantages for a more familiar converse with him than
            the infinite distance of the divine nature would allow of. And
            upon this account the church longed for Christ's incarnation,
            Cant. 8:1. "O that thou wert my brother that sucked the breast
            of my mother! when I should find thee without, I would kiss
            thee, yea, I should not be despised." One design of God in the
            gospel is to bring us to make God the object of our undivided
            respect, that he may engross our regard every way, that
            whatever natural inclination there is in our souls, he may be
            the centre of it; that God may be all in all. But there is an
            inclination in the creature, not only to the adoration of a
            Lord and Sovereign, but to complacence in some one as a
            friend, to love and delight in some one that may be conversed
            with as a companion. And virtue and holiness do not destroy or
            weaken this inclination of our nature. But so hath God
            contrived in the affair of our redemption, that a divine
            person may be the object even of this inclination of our
            nature. And in order hereto, such a one is come down to us,
            and has taken our nature, and is become one of us, and calls
            himself our friend, brother, and companion. Psalm 122:8. "For
            my brethren and companions' sake, will I now say, Peace be
            within thee."
            But is it not enough in order to invite and encourage you to
            free access to a friend so great and high, that he is one of
            infinite condescending grace, and also has taken your own
            nature, and is become man? But would you, further to embolden
            and win you, have him a man of wonderful meekness and
            humility? Why, such a one is Christ! He is not only become man
            for you, but far the meekest and most humble of all men, the
            greatest instance of these sweet virtues that ever was, or
            will be. And besides these, he has all other human
            excellencies in the highest perfection. These, indeed, are no
            proper addition to his divine excellencies. Christ has no more
            excellency in his person, since his incarnation, than he had
            before; for divine excellency is infinite, and cannot be added
            to. Yet his human excellencies are additional manifestations
            of his glory and excellency to us, and are additional
            recommendations of him to our esteem and love, who are of
            finite comprehension. Though his human excellencies are but
            communications and reflections of his divine, and though this
            light, as reflected, falls infinitely short of the divine
            fountain of light in its immediate glory; yet the reflection
            shines not without its proper advantages, as presented to our
            view and affection. The glory of Christ in the qualifications
            of his human nature, appears to us in excellencies that are of
            our own kind, and are exercised in our own way and manner, and
            so, in some respect, are peculiarly fitted to invite our
            acquaintance and draw our affection. The glory of Christ as it
            appears in his divinity, though far brighter, more dazzles our
            eyes, and exceeds the strength of our sight or our
            comprehension; but, as it shines in the human excellencies of
            Christ, it is brought more to a level with our conceptions,
            and suitableness to our nature and manner, yet retaining a
            semblance of the same divine beauty, and a savor of the same
            divine sweetness. But as both divine and human excellencies
            meet together in Christ, they set off and recommend each other
            to us. It tends to endear the divine majesty and holiness of
            Christ to us, that these are attributes of one in our nature,
            one of us, who is become our brother, and is the meekest and
            humblest of men. It encourages us to look upon these divine
            perfections, however high and great; since we have some near
            concern in and liberty freely to enjoy them. And on the other
            hand, how much more glorious and surprising do the meekness,
            the humility, obedience, resignation, and other human
            excellencies of Christ appear, when we consider that they are
            in so great a person, as the eternal Son of God, the Lord of
            heaven and earth!
            By your choosing Christ for your friend and portion, you will
            obtain these two infinite benefits.
              1. Christ will give himself to you, with all those various
                 excellencies that meet in him, to your full and
                 everlasting enjoyment. He will ever after treat you as
                 his dear friend; and you shall ere long be where he is,
                 and shall behold his glory, and dwell with him, in most
                 free and intimate communion and enjoyment.
                 When the saints get to heaven, they shall not merely see
                 Christ, and have to do with him as subjects and servants
                 with a glorious and gracious Lord and Sovereign, but
                 Christ will entertain them as friends and brethren. This
                 we may learn from the manner of Christ's conversing with
                 his disciples here on earth: though he was their
                 Sovereign Lord, and did not refuse, but required, their
                 supreme respect and adoration, yet he did not treat them
                 as earthly sovereigns are wont to do their subjects. He
                 did not keep them at an aweful distance, but all along
                 conversed with them with the most friendly familiarity,
                 as a father amongst a company of children, yea, as with
                 brethren. So he did with the twelve, and so he did with
                 Mary, Martha, and Lazarus. He told his disciples, that he
                 did not call them servants, but friends, and we read of
                 one of them that leaned on his bosom: and doubtless he
                 will not treat his disciples with less freedom and
                 endearment in heaven. He will not keep them at a greater
                 distance for his being in a state of exaltation; but he
                 will rather take them into a state of exaltation with
                 him. This will be the improvement Christ will make of his
                 own glory, to make his beloved friends partakers with
                 him, to glorify them in his glory, as he says to his
                 Father, John 17:22, 23. "And the glory which thou hast
                 given me, have I given them, that they may be one, even
                 as we are one I in them" etc. We are to consider, that
                 though Christ is greatly exalted, yet he is exalted, not
                 as a private person for himself only, but as his people's
                 head; he is exalted in their name, and upon their
                 account, as the first fruits, and as representing the
                 whole harvest. He is not exalted that he may be at a
                 greater distance from them, but that they may be exalted
                 with him. The exaltation and honor of the head is not to
                 make a greater distance between the head and the members,
                 but the members have the same relation and union with the
                 head they had before, and are honored with the head; and
                 instead of the distance being greater, the union shall be
                 nearer and more perfect. When believers get to heaven,
                 Christ will conform them to himself, as he is set down in
                 his Father's throne, so they shall sit down with him on
                 his throne, and shall in their measure be made like him.
                 When Christ was going to heaven, he comforted his
                 disciples with the thought, that after a while, he would
                 come again and take them to himself, that they might be
                 with him. And we are not to suppose that when the
                 disciples got to heaven, they found him keeping a greater
                 distance than he used to do. No, doubtless, be embraced
                 them as friends, and welcomed them to his and their
                 Father's house, and to his and their glory. They who had
                 been his friends in this world, who had been together
                 with him here, and had together partaken of sorrows and
                 troubles, are now welcomed by him to rest, and to partake
                 of glory with him. He took them and led them into his
                 chambers, and showed them all his glory; as he prayed,
                 John 17:24. "Father, I will that they also whom thou hast
                 given me, be with me, that they may behold the glory
                 which thou hast given me." And he led them to his living
                 fountains of waters, and made them partake of his
                 delights, as he prays John 17:13. "That my joy may be
                 fulfilled in themselves," and set them down with him at
                 his table in his kingdom, and made them partake with him
                 of his dainties, according to his promise, Luke 22:30,
                 and led them into his banqueting house, and made them to
                 drink new wine with him in the kingdom of his heavenly
                 Father, as he foretold them when he instituted the Lord's
                 supper, Matt. 26:29.
                 Yea the saints' conversation with Christ in heaven shall
                 not only be as intimate, and their access to him as free,
                 as of the disciples on earth, but in many respects much
                 more so; for in heaven, that vital union shall be
                 perfect, which is exceeding imperfect here. While the
                 saints are in this world, there are great remains of sin
                 and darkness to separate or disunite them from Christ,
                 which shall then all be removed. This is not a time for
                 that full acquaintance, and those glorious manifestations
                 of love, which Christ designs for his people hereafter;
                 which seems to be signified by his speech to Mary
                 Magdalene, when ready to embrace him, when she met him
                 after his resurrection; John 20:17. "Jesus saith unto
                 her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my
                 Father."
                 When the saints shall see Christ's glory and exaltation
                 in heaven, it will indeed possess their hearts with the
                 greater admiration and adoring respect, but it will not
                 awe them into any separation, but will serve only to
                 heighten their surprise and joy, when they find Christ
                 condescending to admit them to such intimate access, and
                 so freely and fully communicating himself to them. So
                 that if we choose Christ for our friend and portion, we
                 shall hereafter be so received to him, that there shall
                 be nothing to hinder the fullest enjoyment of him, to the
                 satisfying the utmost cravings of our souls. We may take
                 our full swing at gratifying our spiritual appetite after
                 these holy pleasures. Christ will then say, as in Cant.
                 5:1. "Eat, O friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly O
                 beloved." And this shall be our entertainment to all
                 eternity! There shall never be any end of this happiness,
                 or any thing to interrupt our enjoyment of it, or in the
                 least to molest us in it!
              2. By your being united to Christ, you will have a more
                 glorious union with and enjoyment of God the Father, than
                 otherwise could be. For hereby the saints' relation to
                 God becomes much nearer; they are the children of God in
                 a higher manner than otherwise could be. For, being
                 members of God's own Son, they are in a sort partakers of
                 his relation to the Father: they are not only sons of God
                 by regeneration, but by a kind of communion in the
                 sonship of the eternal Son. This seems to be intended,
                 Gal. 4:4-6. "God sent forth his Son, made of a woman,
                 made under the law, to redeem them that are under the
                 law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And
                 because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of
                 his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father." The
                 church is the daughter of God not only as he hath
                 begotten her by his word and Spirit but as she is the
                 spouse of his eternal Son.
                 So we being members of the Son, are partakers in our
                 measure of the Father's love to the Son, and complacence
                 in him. John 17:23. "I in them, and thou in me, -- Thou
                 hast loved them as thou hast loved me." And ver. 26.
                 "That the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in
                 them." And chap. 16:27. "The Father himself loveth you,
                 because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came
                 out from God." So we shall, according to our capacities,
                 be partakers of the Son's enjoyment of God, and have his
                 joy fulfilled in ourselves, John 17:13. And by this means
                 we shall come to an immensely higher, more intimate and
                 full enjoyment of God, than otherwise could have been.
                 For there is doubtless an infinite intimacy between the
                 Father and the Son which is expressed by his being in the
                 bosom of the Father. And saints being in him, shall, in
                 their measure and manner, partake with him in it, and of
                 the blessedness of it.
                 And thus is the affair of our redemption ordered, that
                 thereby we are brought to an immensely more exalted kind
                 of union with God, and enjoyment of him, both the Father
                 and the Son, than otherwise could have been. For Christ
                 being united to the human nature, we have advantage for a
                 more free and full enjoyment of him, than we could have
                 had if he had remained only in the divine nature. So
                 again, we being united to a divine person, as his
                 members, can have a more intimate union and intercourse
                 with God the Father, who is only in the divine nature,
                 than otherwise could be. Christ, who is a divine person,
                 by taking on him our nature, descends from the infinite
                 distance and height above us, and is brought nigh to us;
                 whereby we have advantage for the full enjoyment of him.
                 And, on the other hand, we, by being in Christ a divine
                 person, do as it were ascend up to God, through the
                 infinite distance, and have hereby advantage for the full
                 enjoyment of him also.
            This was the design of Christ, that he, and his Father, and
            his people, might all be united in one. John 17:21 23. "That
            they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee
            -- that they also may be one in us; that the world may believe
            that thou hast sent me. And the glory which thou hast given
            me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are
            one; I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect
            in one." Christ has brought it to pass, that those whom the
            Father has given him should be brought into the household of
            God, that he and his Father, and his people, should be as one
            society, one family; that the church should be as it were
            admitted into the society of the blessed Trinity.
     __________________________________________________________________

WICKED MEN USEFUL IN THEIR DESTRUCTION ONLY

  Ezekiel 15:2-4 -- Son of man, What is the vine tree more than any tree? Or
  than a branch which is among the trees of the forest? Shall wood be taken
  thereof to do any work? Or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel
  thereon? Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; The fire devoureth both
  the ends of it, and the midst of it is burnt: Is it meet for any work?

   THE visible church of God is here compared to the vine tree, as is
   evident by God's own explanation of the allegory, in verses 6, 7, and
   8. "Therefore thus saith the Lord God, As the vine tree among the trees
   of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so will I give
   the inhabitants of Jerusalem," &c. And it may be understood of mankind
   in general. We find man often in scripture compared to a vine. So in
   chapter 32 of Deuteronomy, "Their vine is the vine of Sodom, and of the
   fields of Gomorrah. Their grapes are grapes of gall." And Psalm lxxx.
   8. "Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt;" verse 14. "Look down from
   heaven, behold, and visit this vine." And Canticles ii. 15. "The foxes
   that spoil the vines; for our vines have tender grapes." Isaiah v. at
   the beginning, "My beloved hath a vineyard, and he planted it with the
   choicest vine." Jeremiah ii. 2l. "I had planted thee a noble vine."
   Hosea x. 1. "Israel is an empty vine." So in chapter 15 of John,
   visible Christians are compared to the branches of a vine.

   Man is very fitly represented by the vine. The weakness and dependence
   of the vine on other things which support it, well represents to us
   what a poor, feeble, dependent creature man is, and how, if left to
   himself, he must fall into mischief, and cannot help himself. The
   visible people of God are fitly compared to a vine, because of the care
   and cultivation of the husbandman, or vine dresser. The business of
   husbandmen in the land of Israel was very much in their vineyards,
   about vines; and the care they exercised to fence them, to defend them,
   to prune them, to prop them up, and to cultivate them, well represented
   that merciful care which God exercises towards his visible people; and
   this latter is often in scripture expressly compared to the former.

   In the words now read is represented,

   1. How wholly useless and unprofitable, even beyond other trees, a vine
   is, in case of unfruitfulness: "What is a vine tree more than any tree,
   or than a branch which is among the trees of the forest?" i.e. if it do
   not bear fruit. Men make much more of a vine than of other trees; they
   take great care of it, to wall it in, to dig about it, to prune it, and
   the like. It is much more highly esteemed than any one of the trees of
   the forest; they are despised in comparison with it. And if it bear
   fruit, it is indeed much preferable to other trees; for the fruit of it
   yields a noble liquor; as it is said in Jotham's parable, Judges ix.
   13. "And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which
   cheereth God and man?"
   But if it bear no fruit, it is more unprofitable than the trees of the
   forest; for the wood of them is good for timber; but the wood of the
   vine is fit for no work; as in the text, "Shall wood be taken thereof
   to do any work? Or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel
   thereon?"

   2. The only thing for which a vine is useful, in case of barrenness,
   viz. for fuel: "Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel." It is
   wholly consumed; no part of it is worth a saving, to make any
   instrument of it, for any work.

  DOCTRINE

   If men bring forth no fruit to God, they are wholly useless, unless in
   their destruction.
   For the proof of this doctrine, I shall show,
   1. That it is very evident, that there can be but two ways in which man
   can be useful, viz. either in acting, or in being acted upon, and
   disposed of.
   2. That man can no otherwise be useful actively than by bringing forth
   fruit to God.
   3. That if he bring not forth fruit to God, there is no other way in
   which he can be passively useful, but in being destroyed.
   4. In that way he may be useful without bearing fruit.

   I. There are but two ways in which man can be useful, viz. either in
   acting or being acted upon. If man be an useful sort of creature, he
   must be so either actively or passively: There is no medium. If he be
   useful to any purpose, he must be so either in acting himself, or else
   in being disposed of by some other; either in doing something himself
   to that purpose, or else in having something done upon him by some
   other to that purpose. What can be more plain, than that if man do
   nothing himself, and nothing be done with him or upon him by any other,
   he cannot be any way at all useful? If man do nothing himself to
   promote the end of his existence, and no other being do any thing with
   him to promote this end, then nothing will be done to promote this end;
   and so man must be wholly useless. So that there are but two ways in
   which man can be useful to any purpose, viz. either actively or
   passively, either in doing something himself, or in being the subject
   of something done to him.

   II. Man cannot be useful actively, any otherwise than in bringing forth
   fruit to God, than in serving God, and living to his glory. This is the
   only way wherein he can be useful in doing; and that for this reason,
   that the glory of God is the very thing for which man was made, and to
   which all other ends are subordinate. Man is not an independent being,
   but he derives his being from another; and therefore hath his end
   assigned him by that other: And he that gave him his being, made him
   for the end now mentioned. This was the very design and aim of the
   Author of man, this was the work for which he made him, viz. to serve
   and glorify his Maker.

   Other creatures are made for inferior purposes. Inferior creatures were
   made for inferior purposes. But it is to be observed, that man is the
   creature that is highest, and nearest to God, of any in this lower
   world; and therefore his business is with God, although other creatures
   are made for lower ends. There my be observed a kind of gradation, or
   gradual ascent, in the order of the different kinds of creatures, from
   the meanest clod of earth to man, who hath a rational and immortal
   soul. A plant, an herb, or tree, is superior in nature to a stone or
   clod, because it hath a vegetable life. The brute creatures are a
   degree higher still; for they have sensitive life. But man, having a
   rational soul, is the highest of this lower creation, and is next to
   God; therefore his business is with God.

   Things without life, as earth, water, &c. are subservient to things
   above them, as the grass, herbs and trees. These vegetables are
   subservient to that order of creatures which is next above them, the
   brute creation; they are for food to them. Brute creatures, again, are
   made for the use and service of the order above them; they are made for
   the service of mankind. But man being the highest of this lower
   creation, the next step from him is to God. He therefore is made for
   the service and glory of God. This is the whole work and business of
   man; it is his highest end, to which all other ends are subordinate.

   If it had not been for this end, there never would have been any such
   sort of creature as man; there would have been no occasion for it.
   Other inferior ends may be answered as well, without any such creature
   as man. There would have been no sort of occasion for making so noble a
   creature, and endowing him with such faculties, only to enjoy earthly
   good, to eat, and to drink, and to enjoy sensual things. Brute
   creatures, without reason, are capable of these things, as well as man;
   Yea, if no higher end be aimed at than to enjoy sensitive good, reason
   is rather an hinderance than an help. It doth but render man the more
   capable of afflicting himself with care, and fears of death, and other
   future evils, and of vexing himself with many anxieties, from which
   brute creatures are wholly free, and therefore can gratify their senses
   with less molestation. Besides, reason doth but make men more capable
   of molesting and impeding one another in the gratification of their
   senses. If man have no other end to seek but to gratify his senses,
   reason is nothing but an impediment.

   Therefore if man be not made to serve and glorify his Creator, it is
   wholly to no purpose that such a creature is made. Doubtless then the
   all wise God, who doth all things in infinite wisdom, hath made man for
   this end. And this is agreeable to what he hath taught us in many
   places in the scriptures. This is the great end for which man was made,
   and for which he was made such a creature as he is, having a body and
   soul, bodily senses, and rational powers. For this is he placed in such
   circumstances as he is, and the earth is given him for a possession.
   For this he hath dominion given him over the rest of the creatures of
   this world. For this the sun shines on him, and the moon and stars are
   for signs and seasons to him, and the rain falls on him, and the earth
   yields him her increase.

   All other ends of man are subordinate to this. There are inferior ends
   for which man was made. Men were made for one another; made for their
   friends and neighbors, and for the good of the public. But all these
   inferior ends are designed to be subordinate to the higher end of
   glorifying God; and therefore man cannot be actively useful, or
   actively answer any purpose, otherwise than by actively glorifying God,
   or bringing forth fruit to God. Because,

   1. That is not actively useful which doth not actively answer its end.
   That which doth not answer its end is in vain; for that is the meaning
   of the proposition, that any thing is in vain. So that which doth not
   actively answer its end, is, as to its own activity, in vain.

   2. That is as to its own activity altogether useless which actively
   answers only subordinate ends, without answering the ultimate end; and
   that because the ultimate end is the end of subordinate ends. The
   notion of a supreme end is, that it is the end of all inferior ends.
   Subordinate ends are to no purpose, only as they stand related to the
   highest end. The very notion of a subordinate end is, that it is in
   order to a further end. Therefore these inferior ends are good for
   nothing though they be obtained, unless they also obtain their end.
   Inferior ends are not aimed at for their own sake, but only for the
   sake of the ultimate end. Therefore he that fails of his great end of
   all, doth as much altogether fail of his end, and is as much to no
   purpose, as if he did not obtain his subordinate end.

   I will illustrate this by two or three examples. The subordinate end of
   the underpinning of an house is to support the house; and the
   subordinate end of the windows is to let in the light. But the ultimate
   end of the whole is the benefit of the inhabitants. Therefore, if the
   house be never inhabited, the whole is in vain. The underpinning is in
   vain, though it be ever so strong and support the building ever so
   well. The windows also are wholly in vain, though they be ever so large
   and clear, and though they obtain the subordinate end of letting in the
   light: They are as much in vain, as if they let in no light.

   So the subordinate end of the husbandman in ploughing and sowing, and
   well manuring his field is, that it may bring forth a crop. But his
   more ultimate end is, that food may be provided for him and his family.
   Therefore though his inferior end be obtained, and his field bring
   forth ever so good a crop, yet if after all it be consumed by fire, or
   otherwise destroyed, he ploughed and sowed his field as much in vain,
   as if the seed had never sprung up.
   So if man obtain his subordinate ends ever so fully; yet if he
   altogether fail of his ultimate end, he is wholly an useless creature.
   Thus if men be very useful in temporal things to their families, or
   greatly promote the temporal interest of the neighborhood, or of the
   public; yet if no glory be brought to God by it, they are altogether
   useless. If men actively bring no glory to God, they are, as to their
   own activity, altogether useless, how much soever they may promote the
   benefit of one another. How much soever one part of mankind may
   subserve another; yet if the end of the whole be not answered, every
   part is useless.

   Thus if the parts of a clock subserve ever so well one to another,
   mutually to assist each other in their motions; one wheel moving
   another ever so regularly; yet if the motion never reach the hand or
   the hammer, it is altogether in vain, as much as if it stood still. As
   in a clock one wheel moves another, and that another, till at last the
   motion comes to the hand and hammer, which immediately respect the eye
   and the ear, otherwise all the motions are in vain; so it is in the
   world, one man was made to be useful to another, and one part of
   mankind to another; but the use of the whole is to bring glory to God
   the maker or else all is in vain; and however a man may serve among his
   fellow creatures, in a private or public capacity, upon the whole he is
   in vain.

   It may perhaps be objected, that a wicked man may, by being serviceable
   to the public, be useful to many who do bring forth fruit to God, and
   thus glorify him.

   Answer 1. If he be so, he is no further useful than he brings glory to
   God. It all hath an ultimate respect to that glory that is brought to
   God, and is useful no further; as the motion of no one wheel of a clock
   is any further useful, than as it finally respects the right pointing
   of the hand, and striking of the hammer.

   Answer 2. When it is thus, wicked men are useful only accidentally, and
   not designedly. Although a wicked man may, by being serviceable to good
   men, do what will be an advantage to them to their bringing forth fruit
   to God; yet that serviceableness is not what he aims at; this is not
   his end; he doth not look so far for an ultimate end. And how ever this
   end be obtained, no thanks are due to him; it is as to him accidental.
   He is only the occasion, and not the designing cause of it. That fruit
   which is brought forth to the glory of God, is not brought forth by
   him, but by others.
   The usefulness of such a man, being not designed, is not to be
   attributed to him as though it were his fruit. He is not useful as a
   man, or as a rational creature, because he is not so designedly. He is
   useful as things without life may be. Things without life may he useful
   to put the godly under advantages to bring forth fruit, as the timber
   and stones with which his house is built, the wool and flax with which
   he is clothed; but the fruit which is brought forth to God's glory,
   cannot be said for all that to be the fruit of these lifeless things,
   but of the godly man who makes use of them. So it is when wicked men
   put the godly under advantages to glorify God, as Cyrus, and
   Artaxerxes, and others have done.

   III. If men bring not forth fruit to God, there is no other way in
   which they can be useful passively, but in being destroyed. They are
   fit for nothing else.

   1. They are not fit to be suffered to continue always in this world.
   God suffers them to live for the present, but it is only for a certain
   season. They are here in a transitory state. It is not fit that this
   world should be the constant abode of those who bring forth no fruit to
   God. It is not fit that the barren tree should be allowed always to
   stand in the vineyard. The husbandman lets it stand for a while, till
   he digs about it, dungs it, and proves it to be incurable, or till a
   convenient time to cut it down come; but it is not fit that such a tree
   should stand here always. It is not fit that they who bring forth no
   fruit to God, should be suffered to live always in a world which is so
   full of the goodness of God, or that his goodness should be spent upon
   them forever.

   This world, though it is fallen, and is under a curse, and is a
   miserable place to what it once was, yet is full of the streams of
   divine goodness. But it is not fit that those who bring forth no fruit
   to God, should always be continued in partaking of these streams. There
   are these three different states ; a state wherein is nothing but good,
   which is the state of the blessed in heaven; a state wherein is a
   mixture of good and evil, which is the earthly state ; and a state
   wherein is nothing but evil, which is the state of eternal destruction
   and damnation. Now they that bring forth no fruit to God, are not fit
   for either of the former; it is not fit that they should be continued
   in the enjoyment of any of the goodness of God.

   It is not fit that an unprofitable, unfruitful creature, who will not
   glorify his Creator, should always live here to devour the fruits of
   the earth, and consume the fruits of divine bounty; to have the good
   things of this life, as God's wool and his flax, his corn, and wine,
   and oil, spent with him in vain. While a man lives in this world, the
   other creatures of the world are subjected to him. The brute creatures
   serve him with their labor and with their lives. The sun, moon, and
   stars, the clouds, fields and trees, all serve him. But it is not fit
   that these creatures should always be made to serve him, who brings
   forth no fruit to the Creator. Why should God always keep his creatures
   in subjection to that man, who will not be subject to him? Why should
   the creation be always kept in such bondage, as to be subject to wicked
   men? The creatures are made subject to vanity for a little time; God
   hath subjected them to wicked men, and given them for their use. This
   however he would not have done, but as it is only for a little while;
   and the creatures can bear it through the hope of approaching
   deliverance; and otherwise it would have been intolerable. Romans viii.
   20. "For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by
   reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope."

   The creature doth, as it were, groan by reason of this subjection to
   wicked men, although it be but for a while. Romans viii.22. "For we
   know that the whole creation groaneth, and travaileth in pain together
   until now." Therefore surely it would be no way fit that wicked men,
   who do no good, and bring forth no fruit to God, should live here
   always, to have the various creatures subservient to them, as they are
   now. The earth can scarcely bear wicked men during that short time for
   which they stay here, but is ready to spew thee out. It is no way fit,
   therefore, that it should be forced to bear them always.
   Men who bring forth no fruit to God are cumberers of the ground. Luke
   xiii. 7 "And it is not meet that they should be suffered to cumber the
   ground always." God cannot be glorified in this way of disposing of
   unfruitful persons. If such men should be suffered to live always in
   such a state as this, it would be so far from being to the glory of
   God, that it would be to the disparagement of the wisdom of God, to
   continue them in a state so unsuitable for them, forever spending the
   fruits of his bounty in vain upon them. It would also be a
   disparagement to his justice; for this is a world where, "all things
   come alike to all, and there is one event to the righteous and to the
   wicked." If there were no other state but this for wicked men to be in,
   justice could not possibly take place. It would also reflect upon the
   holiness of God. Forever to uphold this world for an habitation of such
   persons, and forever to continue the communications of his bounty and
   goodness to them, would appear as though he were disposed to
   countenance and encourage sin and wickedness.

   2. If men do not bring forth fruit to God, they are not fit to be
   disposed of in heaven. Heaven, above all others, is the most improper
   place for them. Every thing appertaining to that state is unsuitable
   for them. The company is most unsuitable. The original inhabitants of
   that world are the angels. But what a disagreeable union would that be,
   to unite wicked men and angels in the same society? The employments of
   that world are unsuitable. The employments are serving and glorifying
   God. How unsuitable then would it be to plant barren trees in that
   heavenly paradise, trees that would bring forth no fruit to the divine
   glory? The enjoyments of heaven are unsuitable. The enjoyments are holy
   and spiritual enjoyments, the happiness of beholding the glory of God,
   and praising his name, and the like. But these enjoyments are as
   unsuitable as can be to the carnal earthly minds of wicked men. They
   would be no enjoyments to them; but on the contrary would be most
   disagreeable, and what they cannot relish, but entirely nauseate.

   The design of heaven is unsuitable to them. The design of God in making
   heaven was, that it might be a place of holy habitation, for the reward
   of the righteous, and not an habitation for wicked men. It would
   greatly reflect on the wisdom of God to dispose of wicked men there;
   for it would be the greatest confusion. But God is not the author of
   confusion, I Corinthians xiv. 33. It would be contrary to the holiness
   of God, to take wicked men so near to himself into his glorious
   presence, to dwell forever in that part of the creation which is, as it
   were, his own palace, and to sit at his table. We read in Psalm v. 4.
   "Thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness, neither shall
   evil dwell with thee." Therefore it would doubtless be impossible that
   the end of the existence of wicked men should be in any wise answered
   by the placing of them in heaven.

   IV. Men who bring forth no fruit to God, yet in suffering destruction
   may be useful. Although they be not useful actively, or by any thing
   which they do; yet they may be useful in what they may suffer; just as
   a barren tree, which is no way useful standing in the vineyard, yet may
   be good fuel, and be very useful in the fire. God can find use for the
   most wicked men; he hath his use for vessels of wrath as well as for
   vessels of mercy; as in an house there is use for vessels unto
   dishonor, as well as for vessels unto honor. 2 Timothy ii. 20. "In a
   great house there are not only vessels of gold, and of silver, but also
   of wood and of earth; and some to honor, and some to dishonor."
   Proverbs xvi. 4. "The Lord hath made all things for himself; yea, even
   the wicked for the day of evil." I shall briefly take notice of what
   ends God accomplishes by it.

   1. Unfruitful persons are of use in their destruction for the glory of
   God's justice. It was the will of God to glorify his justice, as well
   as his mercy, on his creatures. The vindictive justice of God is a
   glorious attribute, as well as his mercy; and the glory of this
   attribute appears in the everlasting destruction and ruin of the barren
   and unfruitful.
   The glory of divine justice in the perdition of ungodly men appears
   wonderful and glorious in the eyes of the saints and angels in heaven.
   Hence we have an account, that they sing praises to God, and extol his
   justice at the sight of the awful judgments which he inflicts on wicked
   men. Revelation xvi. 5, "Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art and
   wast, and art to come, because thou hast judged thus; for they have
   shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blood
   to drink; for they are worthy:" And Revelation xix. 1, 2: "And after
   these things I heard a great voice, saying, Alleluia: Salvation, and
   glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God; for true and
   righteous are his judgments for he hath judged the great whore, which
   did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blood
   of his servants at her hand."

   2. Unfruitful persons in their destruction are of use for God to
   glorify his majesty upon them. The awful majesty of God remarkably
   appears in those dreadful and amazing punishments which he inflicts on
   those who rise up against him, and contemn him. A sense of the majesty
   of an earthly prince is supported very much by a sense of its being a
   dreadful thing to affront him. God glorifies his own majesty in the
   destruction of wicked men; and herein he appears infinitely great, in
   that it appears to be an infinitely dreadful thing to offend him. How
   awful doth the majesty of God appear in the dreadfulness of his anger!
   This we may learn to be one end of the damnation of the wicked, from
   Romans ix. 22. "What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his
   power known, endured with much long suffering the vessels of wrath
   fitted to destruction?"
   It is often spoken of God, that he is a terrible God. It is a part of
   the majesty and glory of God, that he is a terrible God. God tells
   Pharaoh, that for this cause he raised him up, that he might show his
   power in him, and that his name might be declared through all the
   earth, in his destruction. Exodus ix. 15, 16; and again, chapter xiv.
   17: "I will get me honor upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his
   chariots, and upon his horsemen."

   3. The destruction of the unfruitful is of use, to give the saints a
   greater sense of their happiness, and of God's grace to them. The
   wicked will be destroyed and tormented in the view of the saints, and
   other inhabitants of heaven. This we are taught in Revelation xiv. 10.
   "The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured
   out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation ; and he shall be
   tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy angels,
   and in the presence of the Lamb." And in Isaiah lxvi. 24. "And they
   shall go forth and look upon the carcasses of the men that have
   transgressed against me : For their worm shall not die, neither shall
   their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh."

   When the saints in heaven shall look upon the damned in hell, it will
   serve to give them a greater sense of their own happiness, seeing how
   vastly different their case is from their own. The view of the doleful
   condition of the damned will make them the more prize their own
   blessedness. When they shall see how dreadful the anger of God is, it
   will make them the more prize his love. They will rejoice so much the
   more that they are not the objects of God's anger, but of his favor;
   that they are not the subjects of his dreadful wrath, but are treated
   as his children, are taken near to him, to dwell in the everlasting
   embraces of his love.

   When they shall see the misery of the damned, it will give them a
   greater sense of the distinguishing grace and love of God to them, that
   God should from all eternity set his love on them, and make so great a
   difference between them and others who are of the same species with
   them, are no worse by nature than they, and have deserved no worse of
   God than they. When they shall look upon the misery of the damned, and
   consider how different their own state is from theirs, and that it is
   only free and sovereign grace that makes the difference, what a great
   sense will this give them of the wonderful grace of God to them! And
   how will it heighten their praises! With how much greater admiration
   and exultation of soul will they sing of the free and sovereign grace
   of God to them!

   When they shall look upon the damned, and see their misery, how will
   heaven ring with the praises of God's justice towards the wicked, and
   his grace towards the saints! And with how much greater enlargement of
   heart will they praise Jesus Christ their Redeemer, that ever he was
   pleased to set his love upon them, his dying love! And that he should
   so distinguish them as to spill his blood, and make his soul an
   offering, to redeem them from that so great misery, and to bring them
   to such exceeding happiness!

   With what love and ecstasy will they sing that song in Revelation v. 9.
   10. "Thou art worthy: For thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God
   by thy blood, out of every tongue, and kindred, and people, and nation;
   and hast made us unto our God kings and priests." One end which the
   apostle mentions why God appointed vessels of wrath, is the more to
   make known the wonderfulness of his mercy towards the saints. In Romans
   ix. 22, 23. there are two ends mentioned: "What if God, willing to show
   his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much long
   suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction?" That is one end,
   then another is mentioned immediately after: "And that he might make
   known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had
   afore prepared unto glory ?"

  APPLICATION

   I. Hence we may learn, how just and righteous God is in the destruction
   of those who bring forth no fruit to God. Seeing there is no other way
   in which they can be useful, or in which the end of their being can be
   obtained, certainly it is most just that God should thus dispose of
   them. Why should God be frustrated of his end through their
   perverseness? If men will not do the work for which he hath made and
   fitted them; if they, through a spirit of opposition and rebellion
   against God, refuse; yet why should God suffer himself to be
   disappointed of his end in making them? It doth not become the infinite
   greatness and majesty of God, to suffer himself to be disappointed and
   frustrated by the wickedness and perverseness of sinful worms of the
   dust. If God should suffer this, it would seem to argue, either a want
   of wisdom in God to fix upon a good end, or a want of power to
   accomplish it.

   God made all men that they might be useful; and if they will not be
   useful in their conduct and actions, how just is it that God should
   make them useful in their sufferings! God made all men for his own
   glory; and if they, contrary to the revealed will of God, refuse to
   glorify him actively and willingly, how just is it that God should
   glorify himself upon them in what he doth with them!

   It hath been shown, that there is no other way wherein this can be
   done, but by their destruction. Surely, therefore, it must be just and
   righteous that God should destroy them.

   Men are under no natural necessity of being put to this use of
   glorifying God in their sufferings. God gives them opportunity of
   glorifying him in doing, in bringing forth fruit, puts them under
   advantages for it, and uses many means to bring them to it. But if they
   will not be useful this way, it is very just that God should make them
   useful in the only remaining way in which they can be useful, viz. in
   their destruction. God is not forward to put them to this use. He tells
   us, that he hath "no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the
   wicked turn from his way, and live;" Ezekiel xxxiii. 11. God represents
   the destruction of sinners as a work to which he is backward; yet it is
   meet that they should be destroyed, rather than that they should be
   suffered to frustrate God of the end of their being. Who can blame the
   husbandman for cutting down and burning a barren tree, after he hath
   digged about it, and dunged it, and used all proper means to make it
   fruitful?
   Let those among us consider this, who have lived all their lives
   hitherto unprofitably, and never have brought forth any fruit to God's
   glory, notwithstanding all the means that have been used with them.
   Consider how just it would be if God should utterly destroy you, and
   glorify himself upon you in that way; and what a wonder of patience it
   is, that God hath not done it before now.

   II. This subject ought to put you upon examining yourselves, whether
   you be not wholly useless creatures. You have now heard, that those who
   bring forth no fruit to God, are, as to any good they do, wholly
   useless. Inquire, therefore, whether you have ever in your lives
   brought forth any fruit to God. Have you ever done any thing from a
   gracious respect to God, or out of love to God? By only seeking your
   worldly interest, you do not bring forth fruit to God. It is toot
   bringing forth fruit to God, for you to come to public worship on the
   Sabbath, to pray in your families, and other such like things, merely
   in compliance with the general custom. It is not to bring forth fruit
   to God, that you be sober, moral and religious, only to be seen of men,
   or out of respect to your own credit and honor. How is that for God
   which is only for the sake of custom, or the esteem of men?

   It is not to bring forth fruit to God, for men to pray, and read, and
   hear, and to be strict and diligent in religious and moral duties,
   merely from the fear of hell. What thanks are due to you for not loving
   your own misery, and for being willing to take some pains to escape
   burning in hell to all eternity? There is ne'er a devil in hell but
   would gladly do the same. Hosea x. 1. "Israel is an empty vine; he
   bringeth forth fruit unto himself."
   There is no fruit brought forth to God, where there is nothing done in
   any wise from love to God, or from any true respect to him. God looketh
   at the heart. He doth not stand in need of our services, neither is he
   benefited by any thing that we can do. He doth not receive any thing of
   us, because it benefits him, but only as a suitable testimony of our
   love and respect to him. This is the fruit that he seeks. Men
   themselves will not accept of those shows of friendship, which they
   think are hypocritical, and come not from the heart. How much less
   should God, who searcheth the hearts and trieth the reins of the
   children of men! John iv. 23. "God is a spirit, and they that worship
   him must worship him in spirit and in truth."
   Inquire, therefore, whether you ever in your lives did the least thing
   out of love to God. Have you not done all for yourselves? Zechariah
   vii. 5, 6. "When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month,
   even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even unto me? And
   when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did ye not eat for yourselves,
   and drink for yourselves? "

   III. Another use of this subject may be of conviction and humiliation
   to those who never have brought forth any fruit to God. If, upon
   examination, you find that you have never in all your lives done any
   thing out of a true respect to God, then it hath been demonstrated,
   that, as to any thing which you do, you are altogether useless
   creatures. And consider, what a shameful thing it is for such rational
   beings as you are, and placed under such advantages for usefulness, yet
   to be wholly useless, and to live in the world to no purpose!

   We esteem it a very mean character in any person, that he is a
   worthless, insignificant person; and to be called so is taken as a
   great reproach. But consider seriously, whether you can clear
   yourselves of this character. Set reason to work; can you rationally
   suppose, that you do in any measure answer the end for which God gave
   you your being, and made you of a nature superior to the beasts? But
   that you may be sensible what cause you have to be ashamed of your
   unprofitableness, consider the following things.

   1. How much God hath bestowed upon you, in the endowments of your
   nature. God hath made you rational, intelligent creatures, hath endowed
   you with noble powers, those endowments wherein the natural image of
   God consists. You are vastly exalted in your nature above other kinds
   of creatures here below. You are capable of a thousand times as much as
   any of the brute creatures. He hath given you a power of understanding,
   which is capable of vastly extending itself, of looking back to the
   beginning of time, and of considering what was before the world was,
   and of looking forward beyond the end of time. It is capable of
   extending beyond the utmost limits of the universe; and is a faculty
   whereby you are akin to angels, and are capable even of knowing God, of
   contemplating the divine Being, and his glorious perfections,
   manifested in his works and in his word. You have souls capable of
   being the habitation of the Holy Spirit of God, and his divine grace.
   You are capable of the noble employments of angels.

   How lamentable and shameful it is, that such a creature should be
   altogether useless, and live in vain! How lamentable that such a noble
   and excellent piece of divine workmanship should fail of its end, and
   be to no purpose! Was it ever worth while for God to make you such a
   creature, with such a noble nature, and so much above other kinds of
   creatures, only to eat, and drink, and gratify your sensual appetites?
   How lamentable and shameful to you, that such a noble tree should be
   more useless than any tree of the forest; that man, whom God hath thus
   set in honor, should make himself more worthless than the beasts that
   perish!

   2. How much God hath done for you in the creation of the world. He made
   the earth, and seas, and all the fulness of them, for the use of man,
   and hath given them to him. Psalm cxv. 16. "The earth hath he given to
   the children of men." He made the vast variety of creatures for man's
   use and service. Genesis i. 28. "Have dominion over the fish of the
   sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that
   moveth upon the earth." For the same purpose he made all the plants,
   and herbs, and trees of the field. Genesis i. 29. "I have given you
   every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and
   every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree, yielding seed; to you
   it shall be for meat." He made the sun in the heavens, that glorious
   luminary, that wonderful globe of light, to give light to man, and to
   constitute the difference between day and night. He also made the moon,
   and the vast multitude of stars, for the use of man, to be to him for
   signs and seasons.

   What great provision hath God made for man! What a vast variety of good
   things for food, and otherwise to be for his convenience, to put him
   under advantages to be useful! How lamentable is it, that after all
   these things he should be an useless creature in the world!

   3. How much is done for you in the course of God's common providence!
   Consider how nature is continually laboring for you. The sun is, at it
   were, in a ferment for mankind, unweariedly running his course from
   year to year, and from day to day, and spending his rays upon man, to
   put him under advantage to be useful; every day giving him light that
   he may have opportunity to behold the glorious wisdom of God, and to
   see and serve God. The winds and clouds are continually laboring for
   you, and the waters are going in a constant circulation, ascending in
   the air from the seas, descending in rain, gathering in streams and
   rivers, returning to the sea, and again ascending and descending, for
   you. The earth is continually laboring to bring forth her fruit for
   your support. The trees of the field are laboring and spending their
   strength for you. And how many of the poor brute creatures are
   continually laboring for you, and spending their strength for you! How
   much of the earth is spent upon you! How many of God's creatures are
   devoured by you! How many of the lives of the living creatures of God
   are destroyed for your sake, for your support and comfort!

   Now, how lamentable will it be, if, after all, you be altogether
   useless, and live to no purpose! What mere cumberers of the ground will
   you be! Agreeably to Luke xiii. 7. Nature, which thus continually
   labors for you, will be burdened with you. This seems to be what the
   apostle means, Romans viii. 20, 21, 22, where he tells us, that the
   creation is made subject to vanity, and brought into the bondage of
   corruption; and that the whole creation groans, and travails in pain,
   under this bondage.

   4. How much is done for you in the use of the means of grace. How much
   hath God done to provide you with suitable means and advantages for
   usefulness! How many prophets hath God sent into the world, in
   different ages, inspiring them with his Holy Spirit, and enabling them
   to work many miracles to confirm their word, whereby you now have the
   written word of God to instruct you!

   How great a thing hath God done for you, to give you opportunity and
   advantage to be useful, in that he hath sent his own Son into the
   world! He who is really and truly God, united himself to the human
   nature, and became a man, to be a prophet an teacher to you and other
   sinners. Yea, he laid down his life to make atonement for sin, that you
   might have encouragement to serve God with hopes of acceptance.

   How many ordinances have been instituted for you! How much of the labor
   of the ministers of God hath been spent upon you! Is not that true
   concerning you which is written in Isaiah v. at the beginning,
   concerning the vineyard planted in a very fruitful hill, and fenced and
   cultivated with peculiar care and pains, which yet proved unfruitful?
   How much hath the dresser of the vineyard digged about the barren tree,
   and dunged it, and yet it remains barren!

   Consider what a shame it is that you should live in vain, when all the
   other creatures, that are inferior to you, do glorify their Creator,
   according to their nature. You who are so highly exalted in the world,
   are more useless than the brute creation; yea, than the meanest worms,
   or things without life, as earth and stones: For they all do answer
   their end, in the way in which nature hath fitted them for it; none of
   them fail of it. They are all useful in their places, all render their
   proper tribute of praise to their Creator; while you are mere nuisances
   in the creation, and burdens to the earth; as any tree of the forest is
   more useful than the vine, if it bear not fruit.

   IV. Let me, in a farther application of this doctrine, exhort you by
   all means to bring forth fruit to God. Let it be your constant endeavor
   to be in this way actively useful in the world. Here consider three
   things.

   1. What an honor it will be to such poor creatures as you are, to bring
   forth fruit to the divine glory. What is such a poor worm as man, that
   he should be enabled to bring forth any fruit to God! It is the
   greatest honor of the nature of man, that God hath given him a capacity
   of glorifying the great Creator. It is what no other creature in this
   lower world can do, in the same manner as man. There is no creature in
   the visible world that is capable of actively glorifying God, but man.

   2. In bringing forth fruit to God, you will be so profitable to none as
   to yourselves; you cannot thereby be profitable to God. Job xxii. 2.
   "Can a man be profitable to God?" You may thereby be profitable to your
   fellow creatures; yet not so much as to yourselves. The fruit which you
   bring forth to God will be a greater benefit to yourselves than to any
   one living. You will be more useful to yourselves than to any one else.
   Although you are under a natural obligation to bring forth fruit to
   God, yet God doth not require it of you without a reward. He will
   richly reward you for it. In requiring you to bring forth fruit to him,
   he doth but require you to bring forth fruit to your own happiness. You
   will taste the sweetness of your own fruit. It will be most profitable
   for you in this world to bring forth fruit to God; it will be
   exceedingly to your benefit while here. It will be pleasant to you to
   lead a fruitful and holy life; the pleasure will be beyond the labor.
   Beside this, God hath promised to such a life everlasting rewards,
   unspeakable, infinite benefits. So that by it you will infinitely
   advance your own interest.

   3. If you remain thus unprofitable, and be not actively useful, surely
   God will obtain his end of you, in your destruction. He will say
   concerning the barren tree, "Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground?"
   Christ, in John xv. 6, tells us, "if a man abide not in me, he is cast
   forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them
   into the fire, and they are burned." This is spoken of the barren
   branches in the vine. How would you yourselves do in such a case with a
   barren tree in an orchard, or with weeds and tares in your fields?
   Doubtless, it were in your power, you would utterly destroy them.

   God will have his end; he will accomplish it. Though all men and devils
   unite their endeavors, they cannot frustrate God in any thing; and
   "though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished;"
   Proverbs xi. 1. God hath sworn by his great name, that he will have his
   glory of men, whether they will actively glorify him or no. Numbers
   xiv. 21, 22, 23. "But as truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled
   with the glory of the Lord. Because all those men which have seen my
   glory, and my miracles which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and
   have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my
   voice; surely they shall not see the land which I sware unto their
   fathers, neither shall any of them that provoked me, see it."

   "The ax lieth at the root of the trees; and every tree which bringeth
   not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire;" Matthew
   iii. 10. The end of those men who bring forth nothing but briers and
   thorns is to be burned, as in Hebrews vi. 7, 8. "For the earth which
   drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs
   meet for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God: But
   that which beareth thorns and briers, is rejected, and is nigh unto
   cursing; whose end is to be burned." So we read of the tares, Matthew
   xiii. 30. "Let both grow together until the harvest ; and in the time
   of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the
   tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them;" and in verses 40, 41,
   42, "As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire, so
   shall it be at the end of the world. The Son of man shall send forth
   his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that
   offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace
   of fire: There shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth."

   So it is said of the chaff, Matthew iii. 12. "Whose fan is in his hand,
   and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the
   garner; but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire."

   If you continue not to bring forth any fruit to the divine glory, as
   you have hitherto done, hell will be the only fit place for you. It is
   a place prepared on purpose to be a receptacle of such persons. In hell
   nature ceases to labor any more for sinners: The sun doth not run his
   course to shine upon them, the earth doth not bring forth her fruit to
   be consumed upon them there. There they will have no opportunity to
   consume the fruits of divine goodness on their lusts. In hell they can
   prejudice or encumber nothing, upon which God sets any value. There the
   faithful servants and ministers of God will no longer spend their
   strength in vain upon them. When the barren tree is in the fire, the
   servants of the husbandman are freed from any further labor or toil in
   digging about it, and manuring it.

   In hell they will no more have opportunity to clog and discourage the
   flourishing of religion, and to destroy much good, as they often do in
   this world. In hell they will no more have opportunity to corrupt
   others by their ill example. In hell they will no more have it in their
   power to offend the godly; they may hurt and torment one another; but
   the godly will be out of their reach. In hell there will be no
   ordinances, no Sabbaths, no sacraments, no sacred things, for them to
   profane and defile by their careless and hypocritical attendance.

   Hell, therefore, if you remain unfruitful and cumberers of the ground,
   will be the fittest place for you, and there you will surely have your
   portion assigned you. There God will get himself honor upon you; there
   he will magnify himself in your ruin, in the presence of the holy
   angels, and in the presence of the Lamb; and will be praised upon that
   account by the saints, at the day of judgment; and by all the host of
   heaven throughout everlasting ages.
     __________________________________________________________________

The Vain Self-Flatteries of the Sinner

  Psalm 36:2 -- For he flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be
  found to be hateful.
     __________________________________________________________________

   IN the foregoing verse, David says, that the transgression of the
   wicked said within his heart, "that there is no fear of God before his
   eyes;" that is, when he saw that the wicked went on in sin, in an
   allowed way of wickedness, it convinced him, that he was not afraid of
   those terrible judgments, and of that wrath with which God hath
   threatened sinners If he were afraid of these he could never go on so
   securely in sin, as he doth.

   In our text he gives the reason why the wicked did not fear. It was a
   strange thing that men, who enjoyed such light as they did in the land
   of Israel, who read and heard those many awful threatenings which were
   written in the book of the law, should not be afraid to go on in sin.
   But saith the Psalmist, They flatter themseIves in their own eyes: They
   have something or other which they make a foundation of encouragement,
   whereby they persuade themselves that they shall escape those
   judgments; and that makes them put far away the evil day.

   In this manner he proceeds, until his iniquity be found to be hateful;
   that is, until he finds by experience that it is a more dreadful thing
   to sin against God, and break his holy commands, than he imagined. He
   thinks sin to be sweet, and hides it as a sweet morsel under his
   tongue: He loves it, and flatters himself in it, till at length he
   finds, by experience, that it is bitter as gall and wormwood. Though he
   thinks the commission of sin to be lovely, yet he will find the fruit
   of it to be hateful, and what he cannot endure. Proverbs xxiii. 32. "At
   last it will bite like a serpent, and sting like an adder."

   Here observe,

   1. The subject spoken of is the wicked man, of whom the Psalmist had
   been speaking in the foregoing verse.
   2. His action in flattering himself in his own eyes; i.e. he makes
   himself and his case to appear to himself, or in his own eyes, better
   than it is.
   3. How long he continues so to do, until his iniquity be found to be
   hateful. 'Which may be taken for his sin itself, the wicked will see
   how odious sin is to God', when he shall feel the effects of his
   hatred, and how hateful to angels and saints; or rather the cause is
   here put for the effect, the tree for its fruit, and he will find his
   iniquity to be hateful, as he will find the hatefulness and feel the
   terribleness of the fruit of his iniquity.

  DOCTRINE

   Wicked men generally flatter themselves with hopes of escaping
   punishment, till it actually comes upon them.

   There are but few sinners who despair, who give up the cause and
   conclude with themselves, that they shall go to hell; yet there are but
   few who do not go to hell. It is to be feared that men go to hell every
   day out of this country; yet very few of them suffer themselves to
   believe, that they are in any great danger of that punishment. They go
   on sinning and travelling in the direct road to the pit; yet by one
   mean or other they persuade themselves that they shall never fall into
   it,
   In my present discourse, I shall,

   1. Mention some things in confirmation of the doctrine, that sinners
   flatter themselves with the hope of impunity.
   2. Mention some of the various ways wherein sinners flatter themselves
   in that hope.
   3. Show that sinners generally go on flattering themselves, till
   punishment actually overtakes them.
   I. I am to mention some things in confirmation of the doctrine, that
   sinners flatter themselves with the hope of future impunity.

   1. We are so taught in the word of God. Beside our text, you may see,
   Deuteronomy xxix. 18, 19. "Lest there should be among you man, or
   woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from the
   Lord our God. Lest there should he among you a root that beareth gall
   and wormwood, "and it come to pass when he heareth the words of this
   curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace,
   though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to
   thirst." Where it is supposed that they whose hearts turn away from
   God, and are roots that bear gall and wormwood, generally bless
   themselves in their hearts, saying, we shall have peace.

   See also Psalm xlix. 17,18. "When he dieth, he shall carry nothing
   away: His glory shall not descend after him, though while he lived, he
   blessed his soul." And Psalm 1:21. "These things thou hast done. and I
   kept silence: Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as
   thyself: But I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee."

   2. It is very evident, that sinners flatter themselves that they shall
   escape punishment, by this, that otherwise they would be in dreadful
   and continual distress. Otherwise, as long as they are in sin, they
   could never live and go about so cheerfully as they now do: Their lives
   would be filled with sorrow and mourning, and they would be in
   continual uneasiness and distress; as much as those that are exercised
   with some violent pain of body. But it is evident that it is not in
   fact so; it is apparent that men are careless and secure; that they are
   not much concerned about future punishment, and that they cheerfully
   pursue their business and recreations. Therefore they undoubtedly
   flatter themselves, that they shall not be eternally miserable in hell,
   as they are threatened in the word of God

   3. It is evident that they flatter themselves with hopes that they
   shall escape punishment, as otherwise they would certainly be
   restrained at least from many of those sins in which they now live:
   They would not proceed in wilful courses of sin. The transgression of
   the wicked convinced the Psalmist, and is enough to convince every one,
   that there is no fear of God before his eyes, and that he flatters
   himself in his own eyes. It would be impossible for men allowedly from
   day to day to do those very things, which they know are threatened with
   everlasting destruction, if they did not some way encourage themselves,
   they should nevertheless escape that destruction.

   II. I shall mention some of the various ways wherein sinners flatter
   themselves in their own eyes.

   1. Some flatter themselves with a secret hope, that there is no such
   thing as another world. They hear a great deal of preaching, and a
   great deal of talk about hell, and about the eternal judgment; but
   those things do not seem to them to be real. They never saw any thing
   of them; they never saw hell, never saw the devils and damned spirits;
   and therefore are ready to say with themselves, How do I know that
   there is any such thing as another world? When the beasts die, there is
   an end of them, and how do I know but that it will be so with me?
   Perhaps all these things are nothing but the inventions of men, nothing
   but cunningly devised fables.

   Such thoughts are apt to rise in the minds of sinners, and the devil
   sets in to enforce them. Such thoughts are an ease to them; therefore
   they wish they were true, and that makes them the more ready to think
   that they are indeed true. So that they are hardened in the way of sin,
   by infidelity and atheistical thoughts. Psalm xiv. 1. " The fool hath
   said in his heart, There is no God." Psalm xciv. 6, 7. "They slay the
   widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless. Yet they say, the
   Lord shall not see; neither shall the God of Jacob regard it,"

   2. Some flatter themselves that death is a great way off, and that they
   shall hereafter have much opportunity to seek salvation; and they think
   if they earnestly seek it, though it be a great while hence, they shall
   obtain. Although they see no reason to conclude that they shall live
   long, and perhaps they do not positively conclude that they shall; yet
   it doth not come into their minds that their lives are really
   uncertain, and that it is doubtful whether they will live another year.
   Such a thought as this doth not take any hold of them. And although
   they do not absolutely determine that they shall live to old age or to
   middle age, yet they secretly flatter themselves with such an
   imagination. They are disposed to believe so, and do so far believe it,
   that they act upon it and run the venture of it.

   Men will believe that things will be as they choose to have them,
   without reason, and sometimes without the appearance of reason, as is
   most apparent in this case, Psalm xlix. 11. "Their inward thought is,
   that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to
   all generations; they call their lands after their own names."

   The prepossession and desire of men to have it so, is the principal
   thing that makes them believe so. However, there are several other
   things which they use as arguments to flatter themselves. Perhaps they
   think with themselves, that since they are at present in health, or in
   youth, or that since they are useful men, do a great deal of good, and
   both them selves and others pray for the continuance of their lives;
   they are not likely to be removed by death very soon.

   If they shall live many years in the world, they think that it is very
   probable they shall be converted before they die; as they expect
   hereafter to have much more convenient opportunities to become
   converted, than they have now. And by some means or other, they think
   they shall get through their work before they arrive at old age.

   3. Some flatter themselves that they lead moral and orderly lives, and
   therefore think that they shall not be damned. They think with
   themselves that they live not in any vice, that they take care to wrong
   no man, are just and honest dealers, that they are not addicted to hard
   drinking, or to uncleanness, or to bad language; that they keep the
   Sabbath strictly, are constant attendants on the public worship, and
   maintain the worship of God in their families. Therefore they hope that
   God will not cast them into hell. They see not why God should be so
   angry with them as that would imply, seeing they are so orderly and
   regular in their walk; they see not that they have done enough to anger
   him to that degree. And if they have angered him, they imagine they
   have also done a great deal to pacify him.

   If they be not as yet converted, and it be necessary that they should
   experience any other conversion in order to their salvation, they hope
   that their orderly and strict lives will move God to give them
   converting grace. They hope that surely God will not see those that
   live as they do go to hell. Thus they flatter themselves, as those we
   read of. Luke xviii. 9. "That trusted in themselves that they were
   righteous."

   4. Some make the advantages under which they live an occasion of self
   flattery. They flatter themselves, because they live in a place where
   the gospel is powerfully preached and among a religious people, where
   many have been converted; and they think it will be much easier for
   them to be saved on that account. Thus they abuse the grace of God to
   their destruction; they do that which the scriptures call despising the
   riches of God's goodness: Romans ii. 4. "Or despisest thou the riches
   of his goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering; not knowing that
   the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?"

   Some flatter themselves, because they are born of godly parents, who
   are dear to God, who have often and earnestly prayed for them, they
   hope that their prayers will be heard; and that encourages them to go
   on in the way of neglecting their souls. The Jews had great dependence
   upon this, that they were the children of Abraham: John viii. 33. they
   make their boast. "We be Abraham's seed; and in verse 39. "Abraham is
   our father."

   5. Some flatter themselves with their own intentions. They intend to
   neglect themselves, and give themselves liberty for a while longer, and
   then to reform. Though now they neglect their souls, and are going on
   in sin; yet they intend ere long to bestir themselves, to leave off
   their sins, and to set themselves to seek God. They hear that there is
   great encouragement for those who earnestly seek God, that they shall
   find him. So they intend to do; they propose to seek with a great deal
   of earnestness. They are told, that there are many who seek to enter
   the kingdom of heaven, who shall not be able; but they intend, not only
   to seek, but To STRIVE However, for the present they allow themselves
   in their ease, sloth, and pleasure, minding only earthly things.

   Or if they should be seized with some mortal distemper, and should draw
   near to the grave, before the time which they lay out in their minds
   for reformation, they think how earnestly they would pray and cry to
   God for mercy; and as they hear God is a merciful God, who taketh no
   delight in the death of sinners, they hence flatter themselves that
   they shall move God to have pity on them.

   There are but few who are sinners, and know themselves to be such, who
   do not encourage themselves with intentions of future repentance and
   reformation; but few who do not flatter themselves, that they shall in
   good earnest set themselves to seek God some time or other. Hell is
   full of GOOD INTENDERS who never proved to be TRUE PERFORMERS: Acts
   xxiv. 25. "Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient season, I
   will call for thee."

   6. There are some who flatter themselves, that they do and have done, a
   great deal for their salvation, and therefore hope they shall obtain,
   when indeed they neither do what they ought to do, nor what they might
   do in their present state of unregeneracy; nor are they in any likely
   way to be converted They think they are striving, when they neglect
   many moral and some instituted duties; nor do they exert themselves as
   if it were for their lives; they are not violent for the kingdom of
   leaven.

   There are doubtless many such; many are concerned, and are seeking, and
   do many things, and think that they are in a very fair way to obtain
   the kingdom of God; yet there is great danger that thy will prove at
   last to be some of the foolish virgins, and be found without oil in
   their vessels.

   7. Some hope by their strivings to obtain salvation of themselves. They
   have a secret imagination, that they shall, by degrees, work in
   themselves sorrow and repentance of sin, and love towards God and Jesus
   Christ. Their striving is not so much an earnest seeking to God, as a
   striving to do them selves that which is the work of God. Many who are
   now seeking have this imagination, and labor, reach, pray, hear sermons
   and go to private meetings, with the view of making themselves holy,
   and of working in themselves holy affections.

   Many, who only project and design to turn to God hereafter, are apt to
   think that it is an easy thing to be converted, that it is a thing
   which will be in their own power at any time, when they shall earnestly
   set themselves to it.

   8. Some sinners flatter themselves that they are already converted.
   They sit down and rest in a false hope, persuading themselves that all
   their sins are pardoned; that God loves them; that they shall go to
   heaven when they die; and that they need trouble themselves no more:
   Revelation iii. 17. "Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with
   goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art
   wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked."

   III. Sinners very generally go on flattering themselves in some or
   other of these ways, till their punishment actually overtakes them.
   These are the baits by which Satan catches souls, and draws them into
   his snare. They are such self flatteries as these that keep men from
   seeing what danger they are in, and that make them go securely on in
   the way they are in, "as the bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not
   that it is for his life."

   Those that flatter themselves with hopes of living a great while longer
   in the world, very commonly continue so to do till death comes. Death
   comes upon them when they expect it not; they look upon it as a great
   way off, when there is but a step between them and death. They thought
   not of dying at that time, nor at anytime near it. When they were
   young, they proposed to live a good while longer; and if they happen to
   live till middle age, they still maintain the same thought, that they
   are not yet near death; and so that thought goes along with them as
   long as they live, or till they are just about to die.

   Men often have a dependence on their own righteousness, and as long as
   they live are never brought off from it. Multitudes uphold themselves
   with their own intentions, till all their prospects are dashed in
   pieces by death. They put off the work which they have to do till such
   a time; and when that comes, they put it off to another time, until
   death, which cannot be put off, overtakes them. There are many also
   that hold a false hope, a persuasion that they belong to God; and as
   long as they live, by all the marks and signs which are given of a true
   convert, they never will be persuaded to let go their hope, till it is
   rent from them by death.

   Thus men commonly uphold themselves, and make themselves easy, till
   hell fire makes them uneasy. Everlasting ruin comes upon them as a
   snare, and all their hopes are at once cut off, and turned into
   everlasting despair: I. Thessalonians v. 3. "When they shall say, Peace
   and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a
   woman with child; and they shall not escape."

  APPLICATION

   1. Hence we learn one reason why there are but few saved, and why so
   many perish from under the gospel. All men know that they must die, and
   all that sit under the light of the gospel have been told many a time,
   that after this there is an other world; that there are but two states
   in that other world, a state of eternal happiness, and a state of
   eternal misery; that there is but one way of escaping the misery and
   obtaining the blessedness of eternity, which is by obtaining an
   interest in Christ, through faith in him; and that this life is the
   only opportunity of obtaining an interest in Christ. Yet men are so
   much given to flatter themselves in those ways which we have mentioned,
   that there are but few that seasonably take care of their salvation.
   Indeed they cannot but be in some measure concerned about their souls;
   yet they flatter themselves with one thing or other, so that they are
   kept steadily and uninterruptedly going on in the broad way to
   destruction.

   2. Hence we learn the reason why awakening truths of scripture, and
   awakening sermons, make no more impression upon men. It is in itself a
   wonderful and surprising thing, that God's denunciations of eternal
   misery, and threatenings of casting sinners into the lake that burneth
   with fire and brimstone for ever and ever, do not affect them, do not
   startle them. But the truth is, they flatter themselves, by such means
   as we have mentioned, that this dreadful misery is not for them; that
   they shall escape it, though multitudes of others are involved in it.
   They take not these threatenings to themselves; they seem to think that
   they do not belong to them.

   How many are there in this congregation, who, for all the awakening
   sermons they have heard, are yet secure in sin! And who, although they
   are sensible that they are in a Christless condition, and are still
   going on in sin, yet intend to go to heaven, and expect that by some
   means or other they shall arrive there. They are often told, that God
   is very angry with them; yet they think God is a very merciful God, and
   they shall be able to pacify him. If they be told how uncertain life
   is, that doth not awaken them, because they flatter themselves with
   long life. If they be told how dangerous it is to delay the business of
   religion, they promise themselves, that they will hereafter engage in
   it with more earnestness than others, and so obtain the end, the
   salvation of their souls. Others, when they are told that many shall
   seek who shall not he able to obtain, think surely, that they, having
   done so much for salvation, shall not be denied.

   3. Let every sinner examine himself, whether he do not flatter himself
   in some of those ways which have been mentioned. What is it in your own
   minds which makes you think it is safe for you to delay turning to God?
   What is it that encourages you to run such a venture as you do by
   delaying this necessary work? Is it that you hope there is no such
   state as heaven or hell, and have a suspicion that there is no God ? Is
   It this that makes you secure ? Or is it that you are not much afraid
   but that you shall have opportunity enough a great while hence to mind
   such things? Is it an intention of a future seeking a more convenient
   season? And are you persuaded that God will hearken to you then, after
   you shall have so long turned a deaf ear to his commands and gracious?
   Are you encouraged to commit sin, because you hope to repent of it? Are
   you encouraged by the mercy of God to be his enemies? And do you
   resolve still to provoke him to anger, because you think he is easily
   pacified ?

   Or do you think that your conversion is in your own power, and that you
   can turn to God when you please? Is it because you have been born of
   godly parents that you are so secure? Or do you imagine that you are in
   a fair way to be converted? Do you think that what you have done in
   religion will engage God to pity you, and that he never can have the
   heart to condemn one who has lived in so orderly a manner? Or do you
   think that you are indeed converted already? And doth that encourage
   you to take a liberty in sinning ? Or are you secure, because you are
   so stupid as to think nothing about these things? Do you let these
   concerns wholly alone, and scarcely ever think at all how it will be
   with you after you are dead?

   Certainly it must be one or more of these things which keeps you in
   your security, and encourages you to go on in sin. Examine, therefore,
   and see which of them it is.

   4. By the text and doctrine be persuaded to leave off thus flattering
   yourselves in your own eyes. You are therein informed, that those who
   do as you do commonly continue so doing till their punishment actually
   comes upon them. Thereby you may be convinced of the vanity of all such
   flatteries. Be afraid of that which you are sure is the devil's bait:
   "Surely in vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird," Proverbs
   i. 17.

   You are not only told in the scriptures, that sinners are generally
   thus allured to hell, but your own reason may convince you that it is
   so. For doubtless other sinners have as much ground to hope to escape
   punishment as you; and it is evident, that they generally do hope to
   escape. Men under the gospel almost universally think they shall not go
   to hell: If it were otherwise, they could have no peace or comfort in
   the world. Yet what multitudes have we reason to conclude go down from
   under the preaching of the gospel to the pit of destruction! Now, this
   is surely enough to convince any sober, prudent person of the folly of
   such flattery, and of the folly of every one that doth not immediately
   set about his great work with his might. If you could have access to
   the damned, you would hear many of them curse themselves, for thus
   flattering themselves while they lived in this world; and you would
   have the same doctrine preached to you by their wailings and yellings
   which is now preached to you from the pulpit.

   If your temptation to security be unbelief of the fundamental doctrines
   of religion, such as the being of God, of another world, and an eternal
   judgment, you may consider, that though that makes you secure at
   present, yet it will not do always, it will not stand by when you come
   to die. The fool often in health saith, There is no God; but when he
   comes to die, he cannot rest in any such supposition. Then he is
   generally so much convinced in his own conscience, that there is a God,
   that he is in dreadful amazement for fear of his eternal wrath. It is
   folly, therefore, to flatter yourselves with any supposition now which
   you will not then be able to hold.

   If you depend on long life, consider how many who have depended on the
   same thing, and had as much reason to depend on it as you, have died
   within your remembrance.

   Is it because you are outwardly of an orderly life and conversation,
   that you think you shall be saved ? How unreasonable is it to suppose,
   that God should be so obliged by those actions, which he knows are not
   done from the least respect or regard to him, but wholly with a private
   view! Is it because you are under great advantages that you are not
   much afraid but that you shall some time or other be converted, and
   therefore neglect yourselves and your spiritual interests? And were not
   the people of Bethsaida, Chorazin and Capernaum, under as great
   advantages as you, when Christ himself preached the gospel to them,
   almost continually, and wrought such a multitude of miracles among
   them? Yet he says, that it shall be more tolerable in the day of
   judgment for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for those cities.

   Do you expect you shall be saved, however you neglect yourselves,
   because you were born of godly parents? hear what Christ saith, Matthew
   iii. 9. ''Think not to say within yourselves, we have Abraham to our
   father." Do you flatter yourselves that you shall obtain mercy, though
   others do not, because you intend hereafter to seek it more earnestly
   than others? Yet you deceive yourselves, if you think that you intend
   better than many of those others, or better than many who are now in
   hell once intended.

   If you think you are in a way of earnest seeking, consider, whether or
   no you do not mind other things yet more? If you imagine that you have
   it in your own power to work yourselves up to repentance, consider,
   that you must assuredly give up that imagination before you can have
   repentance wrought in you. If you think yourselves already converted,
   and that encourages you to give yourselves the greater liberty in
   sinning, this is a certain sign that you are not converted.

   Wherefore abandon all these ways of flattering yourselves; no longer
   follow the devil's bait; and let nothing encourage you to go on in sin;
   but immediately and henceforth seek God with all your heart, and soul,
   and strength.
     __________________________________________________________________

THE FUTURE PUNISHMENT OF THE WICKED
UNAVOIDABLE AND INTOLERABLE

    Ezekiel 22:14 -- Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong in the
    days that I shall deal with thee? I the Lord save spoken it, and will do it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   IN the former part of this chapter, we have a dreadful catalogue of the
   sins of Jerusalem; as you may see from the first to the thirteenth
   verse. In the thirteenth, which is the verse preceeding the text, God
   manifests his great displeasure and fearful wrath against them for
   those their iniquities. "Behold, I have smitten mine hand at thy
   dishonest gain which thou hast made, and at thy blood which hath been
   in the midst of thee." The expression of God's smiting his hand,
   signifies the greatness of his anger, and his preparing himself, as it
   were to execute wrath answerable to their heinous crimes. It is an
   allusion to what we sometimes see in men when they are surprised, by
   seeing or hearing of some horrid offence, or most intolerable injury,
   which very much stirs their spirits, and animates them with high
   resentment; on such an occasion they will rise up in wrath and smite
   their hands together, as an expression of the heat of their
   indignation, and full resolution to be avenged on those who have
   committed the injury; as in chap. xxi. 7. " I will also smite mine
   hands together, and I will cause my fury to rest: I the Lord have said
   it,"

   Then, in the text, the punishment of that people is represented.

   1. The nature of their punishment is more generally represented in that
   therein God will undertake to deal with them: God here threatens to
   deal with the sinners in Jerusalem. The prophets could do nothing with
   them. God had sent them one after another; but those sinners were too
   strong for them, and beat one, and killed another. Therefore now God
   himself undertakes to deal with them.

   2. Their punishment is more particularly represented in three things,
   viz. The intolerableness, the remedilessness, and the unavoidableness
   of it.

   (1.) The intolerableness of it: Can thine heart endure?
   (2.) The remedilessness, or the impossibility of their doing any thing
   for their own relief: Can thine hands be strong?
   (3.) The unavoidableness of it: I the Lord have spoken it, and will do
   it.

  DOCTRINE

   Since God hath undertaken to deal with impenitent sinners, they shall
   neither shun the threatened misery, nor deliver themselves out of it,
   nor can they bear it.

   In handling this doctrine, I shall,

   1. Show what is implied in God's undertaking to deal with inpenitent
   sinners.
   2. That therefore they cannot avoid punishment.
   3. That they cannot in any measure deliver themselves from it, or do
   any thing for their own relief under it.
   4. That they cannot bear it.
   5. I shall answer an inquiry; and then proceed to the use.

   I. I shall show what is implied in God's undertaking to deal with
   impenitent sinners...Others are not able to deal with them. They baffle
   all the means used with them by those that are appointed to teach and
   to rule over them. They will not yield to parents, or to the counsels,
   warning, or reproofs of ministers. They prove obstinate and
   stiff-hearted. Therefore God undertakes to deal with them This implies
   the following things:

   1. That God will reckon with them, and take of them satisfaction to his
   justice. In this world God puts forth his authority to command them;
   and to require subjection to him. In his commands he is very positive,
   strictly requiring of them the performance of such and such duties, and
   as positively forbidding such and such things which were contrary to
   their duty. But they have no regard to these commands. God continues
   commanding, and they continue rebelling. They make nothing of God's
   authority. God threatens, but they despise his threatening They make
   nothing of dishonoring God; they care not how much their behavior is to
   the dishonor of God. He offers them mercy, if they will repent and
   return; but they despise his mercy as well as his wrath. God calleth,
   but they refuse. Thus they are continually plunging themselves deeper
   and deeper in debt, and at the same time imagine they shall escape the
   payment of the debt, and design entirely to rob God of his due.

   But God hath undertaken to right himself. He will reckon with them; he
   hath undertaken to see that the debts due to him are paid. All their
   sins are written in his book; not one of them is forgotten, and every
   one must be paid. If God be wise enough, and strong enough, he will
   have full satisfaction: he will exact the very uttermost farthing. He
   undertakes it as his part, as what belongs to him, to see himself
   righted, wherein he hath been wronged Deut. xxii. 35. "To me belongeth
   vengeance." Ibid. vii. 10. "He will not be slack to him that hateth
   him; he will repay him to his face."

   2. He hath undertaken to vindicate the honor of his Majesty. His
   Majesty they despise. They hear that he is a great God; but they
   despise his greatness; they look upon him worthy of contempt, and treat
   him accordingly. They hear of him by the name of a great King; but his
   authority they regard not, and sometimes trample upon it for years
   together. But God hath not left the honor of his Majesty wholly to
   their care. Though they now trample it in the dust, yet that is no sign
   that it will finally be lost. If God had left it wholly in their hands,
   it would indeed be lost. But God doth not leave his honor and his glory
   with his enemies; it is too precious in his eyes to be so neglected. He
   hath reserved the care of it to himself: He will see to it that his own
   injured Majesty is vindicated. If the honor of God, upon which sinners
   trample, finally lie in the dust, then it will be because he is not
   strong enough to vindicate himself. He hath sworn that great oath in
   Numbers xiv. 2 1. "As truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled
   with the glory of the Lord."

   Sinners despise his Son, and trample him under their feet. But he will
   see, if he cannot make the glory of his Son appear, with respect to
   them; that all the earth may know how evil a thing it is to despise the
   Son of God. God intends that all men and angels, all heaven and all
   earth, shall see whether he be sufficient to magnify himself upon
   sinners who now despise him. He intends that the issue of things with
   respect to them shall be open, that all men may see it.

   3. He hath undertaken to subdue impenitent sinners. Their hearts while
   in this world are very unsubdued. They lift up their heads and conduct
   themselves very proudly and contemptuously, and often sin with an high
   hand. They set their mouths against the heavens, and their tongues walk
   through the earth. They practically say as Pharaoh did, "Who is the
   Lord? I know not the Lord, neither will I obey his voice." Job xxi. 4
   1. "They say to God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of
   thy ways."

   Some, who cover their sin with specious show, who put on a face of
   religion, and a demure countenance and behavior, yet have this spirit
   secretly reigning in their breasts. Notwithstanding all their fair
   show, and good external carriage, they despise God in their hearts, and
   have the weapons of war about them, though they are secret enemies, and
   carry their swords under their skirts. They have most proud, stubborn,
   and rebellious hearts, which are ready to rise in opposition, to
   contend with him, and to find fault with his dispensations. Their
   hearts are full of pride, enmity, stubbornness, and blasphemy, which
   work in them many ways, while they sit under the preaching of the word,
   and while the spirit of God is striving with them; and they always
   continue to oppose and resist God as long as they live in the world;
   they never lay down the weapons of their rebellion."

   But God hath undertaken to deal with them and to subdue them; and those
   proud and stubborn hearts, which will not yield to the power of God's
   word, shall be broken by the power of his hand. If they will not be
   willing subjects to the golden sceptre, and will not yield to the
   attractives of his love, they shall be subject to the force of the iron
   rod, whether they will or no.

   Them that proudly set up their own righteousness, and their own wills
   against God, God hath undertaken to bring down; and without doubt, it
   will be done. He hath undertaken to make those who are now regardless
   of God, regard him. They shall know that he is Jehovah. Now they will
   not own that he is the Lord; but they shall know it, Isa. xxvi. 11.
   "Lord, when thine hand is lifted up, they will not see: But they shall
   see."

   Now wicked men not only hate God, but they slight him; they are not
   afraid of him. But, he will subdue their contempt. When he shall come
   to take them in hand, they will hate him still; but they will not
   slight him; they will not make light of his power as they now do; they
   will see and feel too much of the infinity of his power to slight it
   They are now wont to slight his wrath; but then they will slight it no
   more, they will be infinitely far from it, they will find by sufficient
   experience that his wrath is not to be slighted: They will learn this
   to their cost, and they never will forget it.

   4. God hath undertaken to rectify their judgments. Now they will not be
   convinced of those things which God tells them in his word. Ministers
   take much pains to convince them, but all is in vain. Therefore God
   will undertake to convince them, and he will do it effectually. Now
   they will not be convinced of the truth of divine things. They have
   indeed convincing arguments set before them; they hear and see enough
   to convince them; yet so prone are they to unbelief and Atheism, that
   divine things never seem to them to be real. But God will hereafter
   make them seem real.

   Now they are always doubting of the truth of the Scriptures,
   questioning whether they be the word of God, and whether the
   threatenings of Scripture be true. but God hath undertaken to convince
   them that those threatenings are true, and he will make them to know
   that they are true, so that they will never doubt any more for ever.
   They will be convinced by dear experience....Now they are always
   questioning whether there be any such place as hell. They hear much
   about it, but it always seems to them like a dream. But God will make
   it seem otherwise than a dream....Now they are often told of the vanity
   of the world; but we may as well preach to the beasts, to persuade them
   of the vanity of earthly things. But God will undertake to convince
   them of this; he will hereafter give them a thorough conviction of it,
   so that they shall have a strong sense of the vanity of all these
   things.

   Now ministers often tell sinners of the great importance of an interest
   in Christ, and that that is the one thing needful. They are also told
   the folly of delaying the care of their souls, and how much it concerns
   them to improve their opportunity. But the instructions of ministers do
   not convince them, therefore God will undertake to convince them.
   Impenitent sinners, while in this world, hear how dreadful hell is. But
   they will not believe that it is so dreadful as ministers represent.
   They cannot think that they shall to all eternity suffer such exquisite
   and horrible torments. But they shall be taught and convinced to
   purpose, that the representations ministers give of those torments,
   agreeable to the word of God, are no bugbears; and that the wrath of
   God is indeed as dreadful as they declare. Since God hath undertaken to
   deal with sinners, and to rectify their judgments in these matters, and
   he will do it thoroughly; for his work is perfect; when he undertakes
   to do things, he doth not do them by halves; therefore before he shall
   have done with sinners, be will convince them effectually, so that they
   shall never be in danger of relapsing into their former errors any
   more. He will convince them of their folly and stupidity in
   entertaining such notions as they now entertain.

   Thus God hath undertaken to deal with obstinate unbelievers. They carry
   things on in great confusion; but we need not be dismayed at it: Let us
   wait, and we shall see that God will rectify things. Sinners will not
   always continue to rebel and despise with impunity. The honor of God
   will in due time be vindicated; and they shall be subdued and
   convicted, and shall give an account. There is no sin, not so much as
   an idle word that they shall speak, but they must give an account of
   it; Matth. xii 36. And their sins must be fully balanced, and
   recompensed, and satisfaction obtained. Because judgment against their
   evil works is not speedily executed, their hearts are fully set in them
   to do evil. Yet God is a righteous judge; he will see that judgment is
   executed in due time.

   I come now,

   II. To show, that therefore impenitent sinners shall not avoid their
   due punishment....God hath undertaken to inflict it; he hath engaged to
   do it; he takes it as his work, as what properly belongs to him, and we
   may expect it of him. If he hath sworn by his life, that he will do it;
   and if he hath power sufficient; if he is the living God, doubtless we
   shall see it done. And that God hath declared that he will punish
   impenitent sinners, is manifest from, many scriptures; as Deut.
   xxxii.41. "I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward
   them that hate me." Deut. vii. 10. "He will not be slack to him that
   hateth him: He will repay him to his face." Exod. xxxiv. 7. "That will
   by no means clear the guilty." Nahum i. 3. "The Lord is slow to anger,
   and great in power, and will not at all acquit the wicked."
   God saith in the text, "I the Lord hath spoken it, and will do it;"
   which leaves no room to doubt of the actual fulfilment of the
   threatening in its utmost extent....Some wicked men have flattered
   themselves, that although God hath threatened very dreadful things to
   wicked men for their sins, yet in his heart he never intends to fulfil
   his threatenings, but only to terrify them, and make them afraid, while
   they live. But would the infinitely holy God, who is not a man that he
   should lie, and who speaketh no vain words, utter himself in this
   manner: I the Lord have spoken it, and will do it; I have not only
   threatened, but I will also fufill my threatenings; when at the same
   time these words did not agree with his heart, but he secretly knew
   that though he had spoken, yet he intended not to do it? Who is he that
   dares to entertain such horrid blasphemy in his heart?

   No; let no impenitent sinner flatter himself so vainly and foolishly.
   If it were indeed only a man, a being of like impotency and mutability
   with themselves, who had undertaken to deal with them; they might
   perhaps with some reason flatter themselves; that they should find some
   means to avoid the threatened punishment. But since an omniscient,
   omnipotent, immutable God hath undertaken, vain are all such hopes.

   There is no hope that possibly they may steal away to heaven, though
   they die unconverted. There is no hope that they can deceive God by any
   false show of repentance and faith, and so be taken to heaven through
   mistake; for the eyes of God are as a flame of fire; they perfectly see
   through every man; the inmost closet of the heart is all open to him

   There is no hope of escaping the threatened punishment by sinking into
   nothing at death, like brute creatures Indeed, many wicked men upon
   their deathbeds wish for this. If it were so, death would be nothing to
   them in comparison with what it now is. But all such wishes are vain.

   There is no hope of their escaping without notice, when they leave the
   body. There is no hope that God, by reason of the multiplicity of
   affairs which ho hath to mind, will happen to overlook them, and not
   take notice of them, when they come to die; and so that their souls
   will slip away privately, and hide themselves in some secret corner,
   and so escape divine vengeance.

   There is no hope that they shall be missed in a crowd at the day of
   judgment, and that they can have opportunity to hide themselves in some
   cave or den of the mountains, or in any secret hole of the earth; and
   that while so doing, they will not be minded, by reason of the many
   things which will be the objects of attention on that day....Neither is
   there any hope that they will be able to crowd themselves in among the
   multitude of the saints at the right hand of the Judge, and so go to
   heaven undiscovered....Nor is there any hope that God will alter his
   mind, or that he will repent of what he hath said; for he is not the
   son of man that lie should repent. Hath he said, and shall he not do
   it? Hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good? When did God ever
   undertake to do any thing and fail?

   I come now,

   III. To show, that as impenitent sinners cannot shun the threatened
   punishment; so neither can they do any thing to deliver themselves from
   it, or to relieve themselves under it. This is implied in those words
   of the text, Can thine hand. be strong? It is with our hands that we
   make and accomplish things for ourselves. But the wicked in hell will
   have no strength of hand to accomplish any thing at all for themselves,
   or to bring to pass any deliverance, or any degree of relief.

   1. They will not he able in that conflict to overcome their enemy, and
   so to deliver themselves. God, who will then undertake to deal with
   them, and will gird himself with might to execute wrath, will be their
   enemy, and will act the part of an enemy with a witness; and they will
   have no strength to oppose him. Those who live negligent of their souls
   under the light of the gospel, act as if they supposed, that they
   should be able here after to make their part good with God. 1 Cor. x.
   22. "Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he
   ?"...But they will have no power, no might to resist that omnipotence,
   which will be engaged against them.

   2. They will have no strength in their hands to do any thing to appease
   God, or in the least to abate the fierceness of his wrath. They will
   not be able to offer any satisfaction: they will not be able to procure
   God's pity. Though they cry, God will not hear them. They will find no
   price to offer to God, in order to purchase any favor, or to pay any
   part of their debt.

   3. They will not be able to find any to befriend them, and intercede
   with God for them. They had the offer of a mediator often made them in
   this world; but they will have no offers of such a nature in hell. None
   will befriend them. They will have no friend in HELL; all there will be
   their enemies. They will have no friend in heaven: 'None of the saints
   or angels will befriend them; or if they should, it would be to no
   purpose. There will be no creature that will have any power to dellver
   them, nor will any ever pity them.

   4. Nor will they ever be able to make their escape. They will find no
   means to break prison and flee. In hell, they will be reserved in
   chains of darkness for ever and ever. Malefactors have often found
   means to break prison, and escape the hand of, civil justice. But none
   ever escaped out of the prison of hell, which is God's prison. It is a
   strong prison: it is beyond any finite power, or the united strength of
   all wicked men and devils, to unlock, or break open the door of that
   prison. Christ hath the key of hell; "he shuts and no man opens."

   5. Nor will they ever be able to find any thing to relieve them in
   hell. They will never find any resting place there; any place of
   respite; any secret corner, which will be cooler than the rest, where
   they may have a little respite, a small abatement of the extremity of
   their torment. They never will be able to find any cooling stream or
   fountain, in any part of that world of torment; no, nor so much as a
   drop of water to cool their tongues. They will find no company to give
   them any comfort, or to do them the least good. They will find no
   place, where they can remain, and rest, and take breath for one minute:
   For they will be tormented with fire and brimstone; and will have no
   rest day nor night for ever and ever.

   Thus impenitent sinners will be able neither to shun the punishment
   threatened, nor to deliver themselves from it, nor to find any relief
   under it.

   I come now,

   IV. To show, that neither will they be able to bear it. Neither will
   their bands be strong to deliver t}themselves from it, nor will their
   hearts be able to endure it. It is common with men, when they meet with
   calamities in this world, in the first place to endeavor to shun them.
   But if they find, that they cannot shun them, then after they are come,
   they endeavor to deliver themselves from them as soon as they can; or
   at least, to order things so, as to deliver themselves in some degree.
   But if they find that they can by no means deliver themselves, and see
   that the case is so that they must bear them; then they set themselves
   to bear them: they fortify their spirits, and take up a resolution,
   that they will support themselves under them as well as they can.

   But it will be utterly in vain for impenitent sinners to think to do
   thus with respect to the torments of hell. They will not be able to
   endure them, or at all to support themselves under them: the torment
   will be immensely beyond their strength. What will it signify for a
   worm, which is about to be pressed under the weight of some great rock,
   to be let fall with its whole weight upon it, to collect its strength,
   to set itself to bear up the weight of the rock, and to preserve itself
   from being crushed by it? Much more in vain will it be for a poor
   damned soul, to endeavor to support itself under the weight of the
   wrath of Almighty God. What is the strength of man, who is but a worm,
   to support himself against the power of Jehovah, and against the
   fierceness of his wrath? What is man's strength, when set to bear up
   against the exertions of infinite power? Matt. xxi. 44, "Whosoever
   shall fall on this stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall
   fall, it will grind him to powder."

   When sinners hear of hell torments, they sometimes think with
   themselves: Well, if it shall come to that, that I must go to hell, I
   will bear it as well as I can: as if by clothing themselves with
   resolution and firmness of mind, they would be able to support
   themselves in some measure; when, alas! they will have no resolution,
   no courage at all. However they shall have prepared themselves, and
   collected their strength; yet as soon as they shall begin to feel that
   wrath, their hearts will melt and be as water. However before they may
   seem to harden their hearts, in order to prepare themselves to bear,
   yet the first moment they feel it, their hearts will become like wax
   before the furnace. Their courage and resolution will be all gone in an
   instant; it will vanish away like a shadow in the twinkling of an eye.
   The stoutest and most sturdy will have no more courage than the
   feeblest infant: let a man be an infant, or a giant, it will be all
   one. They will not be able to keep alive any courage, any strength, any
   comfort, any hope at all.

   I come now as was proposed,

   V. To answer an inquiry which may naturally be raised concerning these
   things.

   Inquiry. Some may be ready to say, If this be the case, if impenitent
   sinners can neither shun future punishment, nor deliver themselves from
   it, nor bear it; then what will become of them?

   Answer. They will wholly sink down into eternal death. There will be
   that sinking of heart, of which we now cannot conceive. We see how it
   is with the body when in extreme pain. The nature of the body will
   support itself for a considerable time under very great pain, so as to
   keep from wholly sinking. There will be great struggles, lamentable
   groans and panting, and it may be convulsions. These are the
   strugglings of nature to support itself under the extremity of the
   pain. There is, as it were, a great lothness in nature to yield to it;
   it cannot bear wholly to sink.

   But yet sometimes pain of body is so very extreme and exquisite, that
   the nature of the body cannot support itself under it; however loth it
   may be to sink, yet it cannot bear the pain; there are a few struggles,
   and throes, and pantings, and it may be a shriek or two, and then
   nature yields to the violence of the torments, sinks down, and the body
   dies. This is the death of the body. So it will be with the soul in
   hell; it will have no strength or power to deliver itself and its
   torment and horror will be so great, so mighty, so vastly
   disproportioned to its strength, that having no strength in the least
   to support itself, although it be infinitely contrary to the nature and
   inclination of the soul utterly to sink; yet it will sink, it will
   utterly and totally sink, without the least degree of remaining
   comfort, or strength, or courage, or hope. And though it will never be
   annihilated, its being and perception will never be abolished, yet such
   will be the infinite depth of gloominess that it will sink into, that
   it will be in a state of death, eternal death.

   The nature of man desires happiness; it is the nature of the soul to
   crave and thirst after well-being; and if it be under misery, it
   eagerly pants after relief; and the greater the misery is, the more
   eagerly doth it struggle for help. But if all relief be withholden, all
   strength overborne, all support utterly gone; then it sinks into the
   darkness of death.
   We can conceive but little of the matter; we cannot conceive what that
   sinking of the soul in such a case is. But to help your conception,
   imagine yourself to be cast into a fiery oven, or of a great furnace,
   where your pain would be as much greater than that occasioned by
   accidentally touching a coal of fire, as the heat is greater. Imagine
   also that your body were to lie there for a quarter of an hour, all the
   while full of quick sense; what horror would you feel at the entrance
   of such a furnace! And how long would that quarter of an hour seem to
   you! And after you had endured it for one minute, how overbearing would
   it be to you to think that you had it to endure the other fourteen!

   But what would be the effect on your soul, if you knew you must lie
   there enduring that torment to the full for twenty-four hours! And how
   much greater would be the effect, if you knew you must endure it for a
   whole year; and how vastly greater still, if you knew you must endure
   it for a thousand years! O then, how would your heart sink, if you
   thought, if you knew, that you must bear it forever and ever! That
   there would be no end! That after millions of millions of ages, your
   torment would be no nearer to an end, than ever it was; and that you
   never, never should be delivered!

   But your torment in hell will be immensely greater than this
   illustration represents. How then will the heart of a poor creature
   sink under it! How utterly inexpressible and inconceivable must the
   sinking of the soul be in such a case!
   This is the death threatened in the law. This is dying in the highest
   sense of the word. This is to die sensibly; to die and know it; to be
   sensible of the gloom of death. This is to be undone; this is worthy of
   the name of destruction. This sinking of the soul under an infinite
   weight, which it cannot bear, is the gloom of hell. We read in
   Scripture of the blackness of darkness; this is it, this is the very
   thing. We read in Scripture of sinners being lost, and of their losing
   their souls: this is the thing intended; this is to lose the soul: they
   that are the subjects of this are utterly lost.

  APPLICATION

   This subject may be applied in a use of awakening to impenitent
   sinners. What hath been said under this doctrine is for thee, O
   impenitent sinner, O poor wretch, who art in the same miserable state
   in which thou camest into the world, excepting that thou art loaded
   with vastly greater guilt by thine actual sins. These dreadful things
   which thou hast heard are for thee, who art yet unconverted, and still
   remainest an alien and stranger, without Christ and without God in the
   world. They are for thee, who to this day remainest an enemy to God,
   and a child of the devil, even in this remarkable season, when others
   both here and elsewhere, far and near, are flocking to Christ; for thee
   who hearest the noise, the fame of these things, but knowest nothing of
   the power of godliness in thine own heart.

   Whoever thou art, whether young or old, little or great, if thou art in
   a Christless, unconverted state, this is the wrath, this is the death
   to which thou art condemned. This is the wrath that abideth on thee;
   this is the hell over which thou hangest, and into which thou art ready
   to drop every day and every night.

   If thou shalt remain blind, and hard, and dead in sin a little longer,
   this destruction will come upon thee: God hath spoken and he will do
   it. It is vain for thee to flatter thyself with hopes that thou shalt
   avoid it, or to say in thine heart, perhaps it will not be; perhaps it
   will not be just so; perhaps things have been represented worse than
   they are. If thou wilt not be convinced by the word preached to thee by
   men in the name of God, God himself will undertake to convince thee,
   Ezekiel xiv. 4, 7, 8.

   Doth it seem to thee not real that thou shalt suffer such a dreadful
   destruction, because it seems to thee that thou dust not deserve it?
   And because thou dust not see any thing so horrid in thyself, as to
   answer such a dreadful punishment? Why is it that thy wickedness doth
   not seem bad enough to deserve this punishment? The reason is, that
   thou lovest thy wickedness; thy wickedness seems good to thee; it
   appears lovely to thee; thou dust not see any hatefulness in it, or to
   be sure, any such hatefulness as to answer such misery.

   But know, thou stupid, blind, hardened wretch, that God doth not see,
   as thou seest with thy polluted eyes: thy sins in his sight are
   infinitely abominable.-Thou knowest that thou hast a thousand and a
   thousand times made light of the Majesty of God. And why should not
   that Majesty, which thou hast thus despised, be manifested in the
   greatness of thy punishment? Thou hast often heard what a great and
   dreadful God Jehovah is; but thou hast made so light of it, that thou
   hast not been afraid of him, thou hast not been afraid to sin against
   him, nor to go on day after day, by thy sins, to provoke him to wrath,
   nor to cast his commands under foot, and trample on them. Now why may
   not God, in the greatness of thy destruction, justly vindicate and
   manifest the greatness of that Majesty, which thou hast despised?

   Thou hast despised the mighty power of God; thou hast not been afraid
   of it. Now why is it not fit that God should show the greatness of his
   power in thy ruin? What king is there who will not show his authority
   in the punishment of those subjects that despise it! And who will not
   vindicate his royal majesty in executing vengeance on those that rise
   in rebellion? And art thou such a fool as to think that the great King
   of heaven and earth, before whom all other kings are so many
   grasshoppers, will not vindicate his kingly Majesty on such
   contemptuous rebels as thou art?-Thou art very much mistaken if thou
   thinkest so. If thou be regardless of God's Majesty, be it known to
   thee, God is not regardless of his own Majesty; he taketh care of the
   honor of it, and he will vindicate it.

   Think it not strange that God should deal so severely with thee, or
   that the wrath which thou shalt suffer should be so great. For as great
   as it is, it is no greater than that love of God which thou hast
   despised. The love of God, and his grace, condescension, and pity to
   sinners in sending his Son into the world to die for them, is every
   whit as great and wonderful as this inexpressible wrath. This mercy
   hath been held forth to thee, and described in its wonderful greatness
   hundreds of times, and as often hath it been offered to thee; but thou
   wouldst not accept Christ; thou wouldst not have this great love of
   God; thou despisedst God's dying love; thou trampledst the benefits of
   it under foot. Now why shouldst thou not have wrath as great as that
   love and mercy which thou despisest and rejectest? Doth it seem
   incredible to thee, that God should so harden his heart against a poor
   sinner, as so to destroy him, and to bear him down with infinite power
   and merciless wrath? And is this a greater thing than it is for thee to
   harden thy heart, as thou hast done, against infinite mercy, and
   against the dying love of God?

   Doth it seem to thee incredible, that God should be so utterly
   regardless of the sinner's welfare, as so to sink him into an infinite
   abyss of misery? Is this shocking to thee? And is it not at all
   shocking to thee, that thou shouldst be so utterly regardless as thou
   hast been of the honor and glory of the infinite God?
   It arises from thy foolish stupidity and senselessness, and is because
   thou hast a heart of stone, that thou art so senseless of thine own
   wickedness as to think thou hast not deserved such a punishment, and
   that it is to thee incredible that it will be inflicted upon thee.-But
   if, when all is said and done, thou be not convinced, wait but a little
   while, and thou wilt be convinced: God will undertake to do the work
   which ministers cannot do. -Though judgment against thine evil works be
   not yet executed, and God now let thee alone, yet he will soon come
   upon thee with his great power, and then thou shalt know what God is,
   and what thou art.

   Flatter not thyself, that if these things shall prove true, and the
   worst shall come, thou wilt set thyself to bear it as well as thou
   canst. What will it signify to set thyself to bear, and to collect thy
   strength to support thyself, when thou shalt fall into the hands of
   that omnipotent King, Jehovah? He that made thee, can make his sword
   approach unto thee. His sword is not the sword of man, nor is his wrath
   the wrath of man. If it were, possibly stoutness might be maintained
   under it. But it is the fierceness of the wrath of the great God, who
   is able to baffle and dissipate all thy strength in a moment. He can
   fill thy poor soul with an ocean of wrath, a deluge of fire and
   brimstone; or he can make it ten thousand times fuller of torment than
   ever an oven was full of fire; and at the same time, can fill it with
   despair of ever seeing an end to its torment, or any rest from its
   misery: and then where will be thy strength? What will become of thy
   courage then? What will signify thine attempts to bear?

   What art thou in the hands of the great God, who made heaven and earth
   by speaking a word? What art thou, when dealt with by that strength,
   which manages all this vast universe, holds the globe of the earth,
   directs all the motions of the heavenly bodies from age to age, and,
   when the fixed time shall come, will shake all to pieces? There are
   other wicked beings a thousand times stronger than thou: there are the
   great leviathans, strong and proud spirits, of a gigantic stoutness and
   hardiness. But how little are they in the hands of the great God! They
   are less than weak infants; they are nothing, and less than nothing in
   the hands of an angry God, as will appear at the day of judgment. Their
   hearts will be broken; they will sink; they will have no strength nor
   courage left; they will be as weak as water; their souls will sink down
   into an infinite gloom, an abyss of death and despair. Then what will
   become of thee, a poor worm, when thou shalt fall into the hands of
   that God, when he shall come to show his wrath, and make his power
   known on thee?

   If the strength of all the wicked men on earth, and of all the devils
   in hell, were united in one, and thou wert possessed of it all; and if
   the courage, greatness, and stoutness of all their hearts were united
   in thy single heart, thou wouldst be nothing in the hands of Jehovah.
   If it were all collected, and thou shouldst set thyself to bear as well
   as thou couldst, all would sink under his great wrath in an instant,
   and would be utterly abolished: thine hands would drop down at once and
   thine heart would melt as wax.-The great mountains, the firm rocks,
   cannot stand before the power of God; as fast as they stand, they are
   tossed hither and thither, and skip like lambs, when God appears in his
   anger. He can tear the earth in pieces iii a moment; yea, lie can
   shatter the whole universe, and dash it to pieces at one blow. How then
   will thine hands be strong, or thine heart endure?

   Thou canst not stand before a lion of the forest; an angry wild beast,
   if stirred up, will easily tear such a one as thou art in pieces. Yea,
   not only so, but thou art crushed before the moth. A very little thing,
   a little worm or spider, or some such insect, is able to kill thee.
   What then canst thou do in the hands of God? It is vain to set the
   briers and thorns in battle array against glowing flames; the points of
   thorns, though sharp, do nothing to withstand the fire.

   Some of you have seen buildings on fire; imagine therefore with
   yourselves, what a poor hand you would make at fighting with the
   flames, if you were in the midst of so great and fierce a fire. You
   have often seen a spider, or some other noisome insect, when thrown
   into the midst of a fierce fire, and have observed how immediately it
   yields to the force of the flames. There is no long struggle, no
   fighting against the fire, no strength exerted to oppose the heat, or
   to fly from it; but it immediately stretches forth itself and yields;
   and the fire takes possession of it, and at once it becomes full of
   fire. Here is a little image of what you will be the subjects of in
   hell, except you repent and fly to Christ. However you may think that
   you will fortify yourselves, and bear as well as you can; the first
   moment you shall be cast into hell, all your strength will sink and be
   utterly abolished. To encourage yourselves, that you will set
   yourselves to bear hell torments as well as you can, is just as if a
   worm, that is about to be thrown into a glowing furnace, should swell
   and fortify itself and prepare itself to fight the flames.

   What can you do with lightnings? What doth it signify to fight with
   them? What an absurd figure would a poor weak man make, who, in a
   thunder-storm, should expect a flash of lightning on his head or his
   breast, and should go forth sword in hand to oppose it; when a stream
   of brimstone would, in an instant, drink up all his spirits and his
   life, and melt his sword!
   Consider these things, all you enemies of God, and rejecters of Christ,
   whether you be old men or women, Christless heads of families, or young
   people and wicked children. Be assured, that if you do not hearken and
   repent, God intends to show his wrath, and make his power known upon
   you. He intends to magnify himself exceedingly in sinking you down in
   hell. He intends to show his great majesty at the day of judgment,
   before a vast assembly, in your misery; before a greater assembly many
   thousand fold than ever yet appeared on earth; before a vast assembly
   of saints, and a vast assembly of wicked men, a vast assembly of holy
   angels, and before all the crew of devils. God will before all these
   get himself honor in your destruction; you shall be tormented in the
   presence of them all. Then all will see that God is a great God indeed;
   then all will see how dreadful a thing it is to sin against such a God,
   and to reject such a Saviour, such love and grace, as you have rejected
   and despised. All will be filled with awe at the great sight, and all
   the saints and angels will look upon you, and adore that majesty, and
   that mighty power, and that holiness and justice of God, which shall
   appear in your ineffable destruction and misery.

   It is probable that here are some, who hear me this day, who at this
   very moment are unawakened, and are in a great degree careless about
   their souls. I fear there are some among us who are most fearfully
   hardened: their hearts are harder than the very rocks. It is easier to
   make impressions upon an adamant than upon their hearts. I suppose some
   of you have heard all that I have said with ease and quietness: it
   appears to you as great big sounding words, but doth not reach your
   hearts. You have heard such things many times: you are old soldiers,
   and have been too much used to the roaring of heaven's cannon, to be
   frighted at it. It will therefore probably be in vain for me to say any
   thing further to you; I will only put you in mind that ere long God
   will deal with you. I cannot deal with you, you despise what I say; I
   have no power to make you sensible of your danger and misery, and of
   the dreadfulness of the wrath of God. The attempts of men in this way
   have often proved vain.

   However, God hath undertaken to deal with such men as you are. It is
   his manner commonly first to let men try their utmost strength:
   particularly to let ministers try, that thus he may show ministers
   their own weakness and impotency; and when they have done what they
   can, and all fails, then God takes the matter into his own hands. So it
   seems by your obstinacy, as if God intended to undertake to deal with
   you. He will undertake to subdue you; he will see if he cannot cure you
   of your senselessness and regardlessness of his threatenings. And you
   will be convinced; you will be subdued effectually: your hearts will be
   broken with a witness; your strength will be utterly broken, your
   courage and hope will sink. God will surely break those who will not
   bow. God, having girded himself with his power and wrath, hath
   heretofore undertaken to deal with many hard stubborn, senseless,
   obstinate hearts; and he never failed, he always did his work
   thoroughly.
   It will not be long before you will be wonderfully changed. You who now
   hear of hell and the wrath of the great God, and sit here in these
   seats so easy and quiet, and go away so careless; by and by will shake,
   and tremble, and cry out, and shriek, and gnash your teeth, and will be
   thoroughly convinced of the vast weight and importance of these great
   things, which you now despise.
     __________________________________________________________________

Hypocrites Deficient in the Duty of Prayer

    Job 27:10 -- Will he always call upon God?
     __________________________________________________________________

   Concerning these words, I would observe,

   1. Who it is that is here spoken of, viz. the hypocrite; as you may
   see, If you take the two preceding verses with the verse of the text.
   "For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained, when God
   taketh away his soul? Will God bear his cry when trouble cometh upon
   him? Will he delight himself in the Almighty? Will he always call up on
   God?" Job's three friends, in their speeches to him, insisted much upon
   it, that he was an hypocrite. But Job, in this chapter, asserts his
   sincerity and integrity, and shows how different his own behavior had
   been from that of hypocrite. Particularly he declares his steadfast and
   immoveable resolution of persevering and holding out in the ways of
   religion and righteousness to the end; as you may see in the six first
   verses. In the text, he shows how contrary to this steadfastness and
   perseverance the character of the hypocrite is, who is not wont thus to
   hold out in religion

   2. We may observe what duty of religion it is, with respect to which
   the hypocrite is deciphered in the text, and that is the duty of
   prayer; or calling upon God.

   3. Here is something supposed of the hypocrite relating to this duty,
   viz. That he may continue in it for a while; he may call upon God for a
   season.

   4. Something asserted, viz. That it is not the manner of hypocrites to
   continue always in this duty. Will he always call upon God? It is in
   the form of an interrogation; but the words have the force of a strong
   negation, or of an assertion, that however the hypocrite may call upon
   God for a season, yet he will not always continue in it.

  DOCTRINE

   However hypocrites may continue for a season in the duty of prayer, yet
   it is their manner, after a while, in a great measure, to leave it off.
   In speaking upon this doctrine, I shall show,

   I. How hypocrites often continue for a season to call upon God.
   II. How it is their manner, after a while, in a great measure to leave
   off the practice of this duty.
   III. Give some reasons why this is the manner of hypocrites.

   I. I would show how hypocrites often continue for a season in the duty
   of prayer.

   1. They do so for a while after they have received common illuminations
   and affections. While they are under awakenings, they may, through fear
   of hell, call upon God, and attend very constantly upon the duty of
   secret prayer. And after they have had some melting affections, having
   their hearts much moved with the goodness of God, or with some
   affecting encouragements, and false joy and comfort; while these
   impressions last they continue to call upon God in the duty of secret
   prayer.

   2. After they have obtained an hope, and have made profession of their
   good estate, they often continue for a while in the duty of secret
   prayer. For a while they are affected with their hope: They think that
   God hath delivered them out of a natural condition, and given them an
   interest in Christ, thus introducing them into a state of safety from
   that eternal misery which they lately feared. With this supposed
   kindness of God to them, they are much affected, and often find in
   themselves for a while a kind of love to God, excited by his supposed
   love to them. Now, while this affection towards God continues, the
   duties of religion seem pleasant to them; it is even with some delight
   that they approach to God in their closets; and for the present it may
   be, they think of no other than continuing to call upon God as long as
   they live.

   Yea, they may continue in the duty of secret prayer for awhile after
   the liveliness of their affections is past, partly through the
   influence of their former intentions: They intended to continue seeking
   God always; and now suddenly to leave off, would therefore be too
   shocking to their own minds and partly through the force of their own
   preconceived notions, and what they have always believed, viz. That
   godly persons do continue in religion, and that their goodness is not
   like the morning cloud. Therefore, though they have no love to the duty
   of prayer, and begin to grow weary of it, yet as they love their own
   hope, they are somewhat backward to take a course, which will prove it
   to be a false hope, and so deprive them of it.

   If they should at once carry themselves so as they have always been
   taught is a sign of a false hope, they would scare themselves Their
   hope is dear to them, and it would scare them to see any plain evidence
   that it is not true. Hence, for a considerable time after the force of
   their illuminations and affections is over, and after they hate the
   duty of prayer, and would be glad to have done with it, if they could,
   without showing themselves to be hypocrites; they hold up a kind of
   attendance upon the duty of secret prayer. This may keep up the outside
   of religion in them for a good while, and occasion it to be somewhat
   slowly that they are brought to neglect it. They must not leave off
   suddenly, because that would be too great a shock to their false peace.
   But they must come gradually to it, as they find their consciences can
   bear it, and as they can find out devices and salvos to cover over the
   matter, and make their so doing consistent, in their own opinion, with
   the truth of their hope. But,

   II. It is the manner of hypocrites, after a while, in a great measure
   to leave off the practice of this duty. We are often taught, that the
   seeming goodness and piety of hypocrites is not of a lasting and
   persevering nature. It is so with respect to their practice of the duty
   of prayer in particular, and especially of secret prayer. They can omit
   this duty, and their omission of it not be taken notice of by others,
   who know what profession they have made. So that a regard to their own
   reputation doth not oblige them still to practice it. If others saw how
   they neglect it, it would exceedingly shock their charity towards them.
   But their neglect doth not fall under their observation; at least not
   under the observation of many. Therefore they may omit this duty, and
   still have the credit of being converted persons.

   Men of this character can come to a neglect of secret prayer by degrees
   without very much shocking their peace. For though indeed for a
   converted person to live in a great measure without secret prayer, is
   very wide of the notion they once had of a true convert; yet they find
   means by degrees to alter their notions, and to bring their principles
   to suit with their inclinations; and at length they come to that, in
   their notions of things, that a man may be a convert, and yet live very
   much in neglect of this duty. In time, they can bring all things to
   suit well together, an hope of heaven, and an indulgence of sloth in
   gratifying carnal appetites, and living in a great measure a prayerless
   life. They cannot indeed suddenly make these things agree; it must be a
   work of time; and length of time will effect it. By degrees they find
   out ways to guard and defend their consciences against those powerful
   enemies; so that those enemies, and a quiet, secure conscience, can at
   length dwell pretty well together.

   Whereas it is asserted in the doctrine, that it is the manner of
   hypocrites, after a while, in a great measure to leave off this duty; I
   would observe to you,

   1. That it is not intended but that they may commonly continue to the
   end of life in yielding an external attendance on open prayer, or
   prayer with others. They may commonly be present at public prayers in
   the congregation, and also at family prayer. This, in such places of
   light as this is, men commonly do before ever they are so much as
   awakened. Many vicious persons, who make no pretense to serious
   religion, commonly attend public prayers in the congregation; and also
   more private prayers, in the families in which they live, unless it be
   when carnal designs interfere, or when their youthful pleasures and
   diversions, and their vain company call them; and then they make no
   conscience of attending family prayer. Otherwise they may continue to
   attend upon prayer as long as they live, and yet may truly be said not
   to call upon God. For such prayer, in the manner of it, is not their
   own. They are present only for the sake of their credit, or in
   compliance with others. They may be present at these prayers, and yet
   have no proper prayer of their own. Many of those concerning whom it
   maybe said, as in Job xv. 4, That they cast off fear and restrain
   prayer before God, are yet frequently present at family and public
   prayer.

   2. But they in a great measure leave off the practice of secret prayer.
   They come to this pass by degrees. At first they begin to be careless
   about it, under some particular temptations. Because they have been out
   in young company, or have been taken up very much with worldly
   business, they omit it once: After that they more easily omit it again.
   Thus it presently becomes a frequent thing with them to omit it and
   after a while, it comes to that pass, that they seldom attend it.
   Perhaps they attend it on Sabbath days, and sometimes on other days.
   But they have ceased to make it a constant practice daily to retire to
   worship God alone, and to seek his face in secret places. They
   sometimes do a little to quiet conscience, and just to keep alive their
   old hope; because it would be shocking to them, even after all their
   subtle dealing with their consciences to call themselves converts, and
   yet totally to live without prayer. Yet the practice of secret prayer
   they have in a great measure left off.

   I come now,

   III. To the reasons why this is the manner of hypocrites.

   1. Hypocrites never had the spirit of prayer given them. They may have
   been stirred up to the external performance of this duty, and that with
   a great deal of earnestness and affection, and yet always have been
   destitute of the true spirit of prayer. The spirit of prayer is an holy
   spirit, a gracious spirit. We read of the spirit of grace and
   supplication, Zech. iii. 10. I will pour out on the house of David and
   the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplications.
   Wherever there is a true spirit of supplication, there is the spirit of
   grace. The true spirit of prayer is no other than God's own Spirit
   dwelling in the hearts of the saints. And as this spirit comes from
   God, so doth it naturally tend to God in holy breathings and pantings.
   It naturally leads to God, to converse with him by prayer. Therefore
   the Spirit is said to make intercession for the saints with groanings
   which cannot be uttered, Rom. viii. 26.

   But it is far otherwise with the true convert. His work is not done;
   but he finds still a great work to do, and great wants to be supplied.
   He sees himself still to be a poor, empty, helpless creature, and that
   he still stands in great and continual need of God's help. He is
   sensible that without God he can do nothing. A false conversion makes a
   man in his own eyes self-sufficient. He saith he is rich, and increased
   with goods, and hath need of nothing; and knoweth not that be is
   wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. But after a
   true conversion, the soul remains sensible of its own impotence and
   emptiness, as it is in itself, and its sense of it is rather increased
   than diminished. It is still sensible of its universal dependence on
   God for every thing. A true convert is sensible that his grace is very
   imperfect; and he is very far from having all that he desires. Instead
   of that, by conversion are begotten in him new desires which he never
   had before. He now finds in him holy appetites, an hungering and
   thirsting after righteousness, a longing after more acquaintance and
   communion with God. So that he hath business enough still at the throne
   of grace; yea, his business there, instead of being diminished, is,
   since his conversion, rather increased.

   3. The hope which the hypocrite hath of his good estate takes off the
   force that the command of God before had upon his conscience; so that
   now he dares neglect so plain a duty. The command which requires the
   practice of the duty of prayer is exceeding plain; Matt. xxvi. 41.
   "Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation." Eph. vi. 18.
   "Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and
   watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all
   saints." Matt. vi. 6. "When thou prayest enter into thy closet, and
   when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret."
   As long as the hypocrite was in his own apprehension in continual
   danger of hell, he durst not disobey these commands. But since he is,
   as he thinks, safe from hell, he is grown bold, he dares to live in the
   neglect of the plainest command in the Bible.

   4. It is the manner of hypocrites, after a while, to return to sinful
   practices, which will tend to keep them from praying. While they were
   under convictions, they reformed their lives, and walked very exactly.
   This reformation continues for a little time perhaps after their
   supposed conversion, while they are much affected with hope and false
   comfort. But as these things die away, their old lusts revive, and they
   by degrees return like the dog to his vomit, and the sow that was
   washed to her wallowing in the mire. They return to their sensual
   practices, to their worldly practices, to their proud and contentious
   practices, as before. And no wonder this makes them forsake their
   closets. Sinning and praying agree not well together. If a man be
   constant in the duty of secret prayer, it will tend to restrain him
   from willful sinning. So, on the other hand, if he allow himself in
   sinful practices, it will restrain him from praying. It will give quite
   another turn to his mind, so that he will have no disposition to the
   practice of such a duty It will be contrary to him. A man who knows
   that he lives in sin against God, will not be inclined to come daily
   into the presence of God; but will rather be inclined to fly from his
   presence, as Adam, when he had eaten of the forbidden fruit, ran away
   from God, and hid himself among the trees of the garden.

   To keep up the duty of prayer after he hath given loose to his lusts,
   would tend very much to disquiet a man's conscience. It would give
   advantage to his conscience to testify aloud against him. If he should
   come from his wickedness into the presence of God, immediately to speak
   to him, his conscience would, as it were; fly in his face. Therefore
   hypocrites, as they by degrees admit their wicked practices, exclude
   prayer.

   5. Hypocrites never counted the cost of perseverance in seeking God,
   and of following him to the end of life. To continue instant in prayer
   with all perseverance to the end of life, requires much care,
   watchfulness, and labor. For much opposition is made to it by the
   flesh, the world, and the devil and Christians meet with many
   temptations to forsake this practice. He that would persevere in this
   duty must be laborious in religion in general. But hypocrites never
   count the cost of such labor; i. e. they never were prepared in the
   disposition of their minds to give their lives to the service of God,
   and to the duties of religion. It is therefore no great wonder if they
   are weary and give out, after they have continued for a while, as their
   affections are gone, and they find that prayer to them grows irksome
   and tedious.

   6. Hypocrites have no interest in those gracious promises which God
   hath made to his people, of those spiritual supplies which are needful
   in order to uphold them in the way of their duty to the end. God hath
   promised to true saints that they shall not forsake him; Jer. xxxii.
   40. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart
   from me. He hath promised that he will keep them in the way of their
   duty; 1 Thess. v 23, 24. And the God of peace sanctify you wholly. And
   I pray God your spirit, soul, and body, be preserved blameless unto the
   coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calleth you, who
   also will do it. But hypocrites have no interest in these and such like
   promises and therefore are liable to fall away. If God do not uphold
   men, there is no dependence on their steadfastness. If the Spirit of
   God depart from them, they will soon become careless and profane, and
   there will be an end to their seeming devotion and piety.

  APPLICATION

   May be in an use of exhortation in two branches.

   I. I would exhort those who have entertained an hope of their being
   true converts, and yet since their supposed conversion have left off
   the duty of secret prayer, and do ordinarily allow themselves in the
   omission of it, to throw away their hope. If you have left off calling
   upon God, it is time for you to leave off hoping and flattering
   yourselves with an imagination that you are the children of God.
   Probably it will be a very difficult thing for you to do this. It is
   hard for a man to let go an hope of heaven, on which he hath once
   allowed himself to lay hold, and which he hath retained for a
   considerable time. True conversion is a rare thing; but that men are
   brought off from a false hope of conversion, after they are once
   settled and established in it, and have continued in it for some time,
   is much more rare.

   Those things in men, which, if they were known to others, would be
   sufficient to convince others that they are hypocrites, will not
   convince themselves; and those things which would be sufficient to
   convince them concerning others, and to cause them to cast others
   entirely out of their charity, will not be sufficient to convince them
   concerning themselves. They can make larger allowances for themselves
   than they can for others. They can find out ways to solve objections
   against their own hope, when they can find none in the like case for
   their neighbor.

   But if your case be such as is spoken of in the doctrine, it is surely
   time for you to seek a better hope, and another work of God's Spirit,
   than ever you have yet experienced; something more thorough and
   effectual. When you see and find by experience, that the seed which was
   sown in your hearts, though at first it sprang up and seemed
   flourishing, yet is withering away, as by the heat of the sun, or is
   choked, as with thorns; this shows in what sort of ground the seed was
   sown, that it is either stony or thorny ground; and that therefore it
   is necessary you should pass through another change, whereby your heart
   may become good ground, which shall bring forth fruit with patience.

   I insist not on that as a reason why you should not throw away your
   hope, that you had the judgment of others, that the change of which you
   were the subject was right. It is a small matter to be judged of man's
   judgment, whether you be approved or condemned, and whether it be by
   minister or people, wise or unwise. I Cor. iv. 3. " It is a very small
   thing that I should be judged of you or of man's judgment." If your
   goodness have proved to be as the morning cloud and early dew if you be
   one of those who have forsaken God, and left off calling upon his name,
   you have the judgment of God, and the sentence of God in the Scriptures
   against you, which is a thousand times more than to have the judgment
   of all the wise and godly men and ministers in the world in your favor.

   Others, from your account of things, may have been obliged to have
   charity for you, and to think that, provided you were not mistaken, and
   in your account did not misrepresent things, or express them by wrong
   terms, you were really converted. But what a miserable foundation is
   this, upon which to build an hope as to your eternal state!

   Here I request your attention to a few things in particular, which I
   have to say to you concerning your hope.

   1. Why will you retain that hope which by evident experience you find
   poisons you? Is it reasonable to think, that an holy hope, an hope that
   is from heaven, would have such an influence? No surely; nothing of
   such a malignant influence comes from that world of purity and glory.
   No poison groweth in the paradise of God. The same hope which leads men
   to sin in this world will lead to hell hereafter. Why therefore will
   you retain such an hope, of which your own experience shows you the ill
   tendency, in that it encourages you to lead a wicked life? For
   certainly that life is a wicked life wherein you live in the neglect of
   so well known a duty as that of secret prayer, and in the disobedience
   of so plain a command of God, as that by which this duty is enjoined.
   And is not a way of disobedience to God a way to hell?

   If your own experience of the nature and tendency of your hope will not
   convince you of the falseness of it, what will? Are you resolved to
   retain your hope, let it prove ever so unsound and hurtful? Will you
   hold it fast till you go to hell with it? Many men cling to a false
   hope, and embrace it so closely, that they never let it go till the
   flames of hell cause their arms to unclench and let go their hold.
   Consider how you will answer it at the day of judgment when God shall
   call you to an account for your folly in resting in such an hope. Will
   it be a sufficient answer for you to say, that you had the charity of
   others, and that they thought your conversion was right?

   Certainly it is foolish for men to imagine, that God had no more
   wisdom, or could contrive no other way of bestowing comfort and hope of
   eternal life than one which should encourage men to forsake him.

   2. How is your doing, as you do, consistent with loving God above all?
   If you have not spirit to love God above your dearest earthly friends,
   and your most pleasant earthly enjoyments; the scriptures are very
   plain, and full in it, that you are not true Christians. But if you had
   indeed such a spirit, would you thus grow weary of the practice of
   drawing near to him, and become habitually so averse to it, as in a
   great measure to cast off so plain a duty which is so much the life of
   a child of God? It is the nature of love to be averse to absence, and
   to love a near access to those whom we love. We love to be with them;
   we delight to come often to them, and to have much conversation with
   them. But when a person who hath heretofore been wont to converse
   freely with another, by degrees forsakes him, grows strange, and
   converses with him but little, and that although the other be
   importunate with him for the continuance of their former intimacy; this
   plainly shows the coldness of his heart towards him.

   The neglect of the duty of prayer seems to be inconsistent with supreme
   love to Go also upon another account, and that is, that it is against
   the will of God so plainly revealed. True love to God seeks to please
   God in every thing, and universally to conform to his will.

   3 Your thus restraining prayer before God is not only inconsistent with
   the love, but also with the fear of God it is an argument that you cast
   off fear, as is manifest by that text, Job. xv. 4. "Yea, thou castest
   off fear, and restrainest prayer before God." While you thus live in
   the transgression of so plain a command of God, you evidently show,
   that there is no fear of God before your eyes. Psal. xxxvi. 1. "The
   transgression of the wicked saith within my heart, that there is no
   fear of God before his eyes."

   4. Consider how living in such a neglect is inconsistent with leading
   an holy life. We are abundantly instructed in scripture, that true
   Christians do lead an holy life; that without holiness no man shall see
   the Lord, Heb. xii. 14; and that every one that hath this hope in him,
   purifieth himself, even as Christ is pure, 1 John iii. 3. In Prov. xvi.
   17, it is said, The highway of the upright is to depart from evil, i.e.
   it is, as it were, the common beaten road in which all the godly
   travel. To the like purpose is Isa. xxxv. 8. A highway shall be there,
   and a way, and it shall be called the way of holiness; the unclean
   shall not pass over it, but it shall be for those, i. e. those redeemed
   persons spoken of in the foregoing verses. It is spoken of in Rom.
   viii. 1, as the character of all believers, that they walk not after
   the flesh, but after the spirit.

   But how is a life, in a great measure prayerless, consistent with an
   holy life? To lead an holy life is to lead a life devoted to God; a
   life of worshipping and serving God; a life consecrated to the service
   of God. But how doth he lead such a life who doth not so much as
   maintain the duty of prayer? How can such a man be said to walk by the
   Spirit and to be a servant of the Most High God? An holy life is a life
   of faith. The life that true Christians live in the world they live by
   the faith of the Son of God. But who can believe that man lives by
   faith who lives without prayer, which, is the natural expression of
   faith? Prayer is as natural an expression of faith as breathing is of
   life; and to say a man lives a life of faith, and yet lives a
   prayerless life, is every whit as inconsistent and incredible, as to
   say, that a man lives without breathing. A prayerless life is so far
   from being an holy life, that it is a profane life. He that lives so,
   lives like an heathen, who calleth not on God's name; he that lives a
   prayerless life, lives without God in the world.

   5. If you live in the neglect of secret prayer, you show your good will
   to neglect all the worship of God. He that prays only when he prays
   with others, would not pray at all, were it not that the eyes of others
   are upon him. He that will not pray where none but God seeth him,
   manifestly doth not pray at all out of respect to God, or regard to his
   all-seeing eye, and therefore doth in effect cast off all prayer. And
   he that casts off prayer, in effect casts off all the worship of God,
   of which prayer is the principal duty. Now, what a miserable saint is
   he who is no worshipper of God! He that casts off the worship of God,
   in effect casts off God himself: He refuses to own him, or to be
   conversant with him as his God. For the way in which men own God, and
   are conversant with him as their God, is by worshipping him.

   6. How can you expect to dwell with God for ever, if you so neglect and
   forsake him here? This your practice shows, that you place not your
   happiness in God, in nearness to him, and communion with him. He Who
   refuses to come and visit, and converse with a friend, and who in a
   great measure forsakes him, when he is abundantly invited and
   importuned to come; plainly shows that he places not his happiness in,
   the company and conversation of that friend. Now, if this be the case
   with you respecting God, then how can you expect to have it for your
   happiness to all eternity, to be with God, and to enjoy holy communion
   with him?

   Let those persons who hope they are converted, and yet have in a great
   measure left off the duty of secret prayer, and whose manner it is
   ordinarily to neglect it, for their own sake seriously consider these
   things. For what will profit then to please themselves with that, while
   they live, which will fail them at last, and leave them in fearful and
   amazing disappointment?

   It is probable, that some of you who have entertained a good, opinion
   of your state, and have looked upon yourselves as converts; but have of
   late in a great measure left off the duty of secret prayer; will this
   evening attend secret prayer, and so continue to do for a little while;
   after your hearing this sermon, to the end, that you may solve the
   difficulty, and the objection which is made against the truth of your
   hope. But this will not hold. As it hath been in former instances of
   the like nature, so what you now hear will have such effect upon you
   but a little while. When the business and cares of the world shall
   again begin to crowd a little upon you, or next time you shall go out
   into young company, it is probable you will again neglect this duty.
   The next time a frolic shall be appointed, to which it is proposed to
   you to go, it is highly probable you will neglect not only secret
   prayer; but also family prayer. Or at least, after a while, you will
   come to the same pass again, as before, in casting off fear and
   restraining prayer before God.

   It is not very likely that you will ever be constant and persevering in
   this duty, until you shall have obtained a better principle in your
   hearts. The streams which have no springs to feed them will dry up. The
   drought and heat consume the snow waters. Although they run plentifully
   in the spring, yet when the sun ascends higher with a burning heat they
   are gone. The seed that is sown in stony places, though it seem to
   flourish at present, yet as the sun shall rise with a burning heat,
   will wither away. None will bring forth fruit with patience, but those
   whose hearts are become good ground.

   Without any heavenly seed remaining in them, men may whenever they fall
   in among the godly, continue all their lives to talk like saints. They
   may, for their credit's sake, tell of what they have experienced But
   their deeds will not hold. They may continue to tell of their inward
   experiences, and yet live in the neglect of secret prayer, and of other
   duties.

   II. I would take occasion from this doctrine to exhort all to persevere
   in the duty of prayer. This exhortation is much insisted on in the word
   of God. It is insisted on in the Old Testament; I Chron. xvi. II. "Seek
   the Lord and his strength, seek his face continually."...Isai. lxii. 7.
   "Ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence;" i. e. be not
   silent as to the voice of prayer, as is manifest by the following
   words, "and give him no rest till he establish and till he make
   Jerusalem a praise in the earth," Israel of old is reproved for growing
   weary of the duty of prayer. Isai. xliii. 22. "But thou hast not called
   upon me, Jacob, thou hast been weary of me, Israel."

   Perseverance in the duty of prayer is very much insisted on in the New
   Testament; as Luke xviii. at the beginning, "A man ought always to
   pray, and not to faint;" i. e. not to be discouraged or weary of the
   duty; but should always continue in it. Again, Luke xxi. 36. "Watch ye
   therefore, and pray always." We have the example of Anna the prophetess
   set before us, Luke i. 36, &c. who, though she had lived to be more
   than an hundred years old, yet never was weary of this duty. It is
   said, "She departed not from the temple, but served God, with fastings
   and prayers, night and day." Cornelius also is commended for his
   constancy in this duty. It is said, that he prayed to God always; Acts
   x. 2. The Apostle Paul, in his epistles, insists very much on constancy
   in this duty; Rom. xii. 12. "Continuing instant in prayer." Eph. vi.
   18,19. "Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit,
   and watching thereunto with all perseverance." Col. iv. 2. "Continue in
   prayer, and watch in the same." I Thess. v. 17. "Pray without ceasing."
   To the same effect the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. iv. 7. "Watch unto
   prayer."....Thus abundantly the scripture insists upon it, that we
   should persevere in the duty of prayer; which shows that, it is of very
   great importance that we should persevere. If the contrary be the
   manner of hypocrites, as hath been shown in the doctrine, then surely
   we ought to beware of this leaven.

   But here let the following things be particularly considered as motives
   to perseverance in this duty.

   1. That perseverance in the way of duty is necessary to salvation, and
   is abundantly declared so to be in the holy scriptures; as Isai. lxiv.
   5. "Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, those
   that remember thee in thy ways: Behold, thou art wroth, for we have
   sinned: In those is continuance, and we shall be saved." Heb. x. 38,
   39. "Now the just shall live by faith: But if any man draw back, my
   soul hath no pleasure in him. But we are not of them who draw back unto
   perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the soul." Rom.
   xi. 22. "Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: On them
   which fell, severity; but towards thee, goodness, if thou continue in
   his goodness; otherwise thou also shalt be cut off....So in many other
   places.

   Many, when they think they are converted, seem to imagine that their
   work is done, and that there is nothing else needful in order to their
   going to heaven. Indeed perseverance in holiness of life is not
   necessary to salvation, as the righteousness by which a right to
   salvation is obtained. Nor is actual perseverance necessary in order to
   our becoming interested in that righteousness by which we are
   justified. For as soon as ever a soul hath believed in Christ, or hath
   put forth one act of faith in him, it becomes interested in his
   righteousness, and in all the promises purchased by it.

   But persevering in the way of duty is necessary to salvation, as a
   concomitant and evidence of a title to salvation. There is never a
   title to salvation without it, though it be not the righteousness by
   which a title to salvation is obtained. It is necessary to salvation,
   as it is the necessary consequence of true faith. It is an evidence
   which universally attends uprightness, and the defect of it is an
   infallible evidence of the want of uprightness. Psal. cxxv. 4, 5. There
   such as are good and upright in heart, are distinguished from such as
   fall away or turn aside: "Do good, O Lord, to those that are good, and
   to them that are upright in their hearts. As for such as turn aside to
   their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of
   iniquity. But peace shall be upon Israel." It is mentioned as an
   evidence that the hearts of the children of Israel were not right with
   God, that they did not persevere in the ways of holiness. Psal.
   lxxviii. 8. "A generation that set not their hearts aright, and whose
   spirit was not steadfast with God."

   Christ gives this as a distinguishing character of those that are his
   disciples indeed, and of a true and saving faith, that it is
   accompanied with perseverance in the obedience of Christ's word. John
   viii. 31. "Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, if ye
   continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed." This is
   mentioned as a necessary evidence of an interest in Christ, Heb. iii.
   14. "We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our
   confidence steadfast to the end."

   Perseverance is not only a necessary concomitant and evidence of a
   title to salvation; but also a necessary prerequisite to the actual
   possession of eternal life. It is the only way to heaven, the narrow
   way that leadeth to life. Hence Christ exhorts the church of
   Philadelphia to persevere in holiness from this consideration, that it
   was necessary in order to her obtaining the crown. Rev. iii. 11. "Hold
   fast that which thou hast, that no man take thy crown." It is
   necessary, not only that persons should once have been walking in the
   way of duty, but that they should be found so doing when Christ cometh.
   Luke ix. 43. "Blessed is that servant whom his lord, when he cometh,
   shall find so doing." Holding out to the end is often made the
   condition of actual salvation. Mat. x. 22. "He that endureth to the
   end, the same shall be saved:" And Rev. ii. 10. "Be thou faithful unto
   death, and I will give thee a crown of life."

   2. In order to your own perseverance in the way of duty, your own care
   and watchfulness is necessary. For though it be promised that true
   saints shall persevere, yet that is no argument that their care and
   watchfulness is not necessary in order to it; because their care to
   keep the commands of God is the thing promised. If the saints should
   fail of care, watchfulness, and diligence to persevere in holiness,
   that failure of their care and diligence would itself be a failure of
   holiness. They who persevere not in watchfulness and diligence,
   persevere not in holiness of life, for holiness of life very much
   consists in watchfulness and diligence to keep the commands of God. It
   is one promise of the covenant of grace, that the Saints shall keep
   God's commandments. Ezek. xi. 19, 20. Yet that is no argument that they
   have no need to take care to keep these commandments, or to do their
   duty. So the promise of God, that the saints shall persevere in
   holiness, is no argument that it is not necessary that they should take
   heed lest they fall away.

   Therefore the scriptures abundantly warn men to watch over themselves
   diligently, and to give earnest heed lest they fall away. 1 Cor. xv.
   13. "Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong."
   1 Cor. x. 12. "Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he
   fall." Heb. iii. 12, 13, 14. "Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any
   of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God; but
   exhort one another daily, while it is called today, lest any of you be
   hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. For we are made partakers of
   Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the
   end." Heb. iv. 1. "Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us
   of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it."
   2 Peter iii. 17. "Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things
   before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the
   wicked, fall from your own steadfastness." 2 John v. 8. "Look to
   yourselves that we lose not those things which we have wrought, but
   that we receive a full reward."

   Thus you see how earnestly the scriptures press on Christians
   exhortations to take diligent heed to themselves that they fall not
   away. And certainly these cautions are not without reason.

   The scriptures particularly insist upon watchfulness in order to
   perseverance in the duty of prayer. Watch and pray, saith Christ; which
   implies that we should watch unto prayer, as the Apostle Peter says, 1
   Pet. iv. 7. It implies, that we should watch against a neglect of
   prayer, as well as against other sins. The apostle, in places which
   have been already mentioned, directs us to pray with all prayer,
   watching there unto with all perseverance, and to continue in prayer,
   and watch in the same. Nor is it any wonder that the apostles so much
   insisted on watching, in order to a continuance in prayer with all
   perseverance; for there are many temptations to neglect this duty;
   first to be inconstant in it, and from time to time to omit it; then in
   a great measure to neglect it. The devil watches to draw us away from
   God, and to hinder us from going to him in prayer. We are surrounded
   with one and another tempting object, business, and diversion:
   Particularly we meet with many things which are great temptations to a
   neglect of this duty.

   3. To move you to persevere in the duty of prayer, consider how much
   you always stand in need of the help of God. If persons who have
   formerly attended this duty, leave it off, the language of it is, that
   now they stand in no further need of God's help, that they have no
   further occasion to go to God with requests and supplications: When
   indeed it is in God we live, and move, and have our being. We cannot
   draw a breath without his help. You need his help every day, for the
   supply of your outward wants; and especially you stand in continual
   need of him to help your souls. Without his protection they would
   immediately fall into the hands of the devil, who always stands as a
   roaring lion, ready, whenever he is permitted, to fall upon the souls
   of men and devour them. If God should indeed preserve your lives, but
   should otherwise forsake and leave you to yourselves, you would be most
   miserable: Your lives would be a curse to you.

   Those that are converted, if God should forsake them, would soon fall
   away totally from a state of grace into a state more miserable than
   ever they were in before their conversion. They have no strength of
   their own to resist those powerful enemies who surround them. Sin and
   Satan would immediately carry them away, as a mighty flood, if God
   should forsake them. You stand in need of daily supplies from God.
   Without God you can receive no spiritual light nor comfort, can
   exercise no grace, can bring forth no fruit. Without God your souls
   will wither and pine away, and sink into a most wretched state. You
   continually need the instructions and directions of God. What can a
   little child do, in a vast howling wilderness, without some one to
   guide it, and to lead it in the right way? Without God you will soon
   fall into snares, and pits, and many fatal calamities.
   Seeing therefore you stand in such continual need of the help of God,
   how reasonable is it that you should continually seek it of him, and
   perseveringly acknowledge your dependence upon him, by resorting to
   him, to spread your needs before him, and to offer up your requests to
   him in prayer. Let us consider how miserable we should be, if we should
   leave off prayer, and God at the same time should leave off to take any
   care of us, or to afford us any more supplies of his grace. By our
   constancy in prayer, we cannot be profitable to God; and if we leave it
   off, God will sustain no damage: He doth not need our prayers; Job x.
   6, 7. But if God cease to care for us and to help us, we immediately
   sink: We can do nothing: We can receive nothing without him.

   4. Consider the great benefit of a constant, diligent, and persevering
   attendance on this duty. It is one of the greatest and most excellent
   means of nourishing the new nature, and of causing the soul to flourish
   and prosper. It is an excellent mean of keeping up an acquaintance with
   God, and of growing in the knowledge of God. It is the way to a life of
   communion with God. It is an excellent mean of taking off the heart
   from the vanities of the world and of causing the mind to be conversant
   in heaven. It is an excellent preservative from sin and the wiles of
   the devil, and a powerful antidote against the poison of the old
   serpent. It is a duty whereby strength is derived from God against the
   lusts and corruptions of the heart, and the snares of the world.

   It hath a great tendency to keep the soul in a wakeful frame, and to
   lead us to a strict walk with God, and to a life that shall be fruitful
   in such good works, as tend to adorn the doctrine of Christ, and to
   cause our light so to shine before others, that they, seeing our good
   works, shall glorify our Father who is in heaven And if the duty be
   constantly and diligently attended, it will be a very pleasant duty.
   Slack and slothful attendance upon it, and unsteadiness in it, are the
   causes which make it so great a burden as it is to some persons. Their
   slothfulness in it hath naturally the effect to beget a dislike of the
   duty and a great indisposition to it. But if it be constantly and
   diligently attended, it is one of the best means of leading not only a
   Christian and amiable, but also a pleasant life; a life of much sweet
   fellowship with Christ, and of the abundant enjoyment of the light of
   his countenance.

   Besides, the great power which prayer, when duly attended, hath with
   God, is worthy of your notice. By it men become like Jacob, who, as a
   prince, had power with God, and prevailed, when he wrestled with God
   for the blessing. See the power of prayer represented in James v.
   16,18. By these things you may be sensible how much you will lose, if
   you shall be negligent of this great duty of calling upon God; and how
   ill you will consult your own interest by such a neglect.
   I conclude my discourse with two directions in order to constancy and
   perseverance in this duty.

   1. Watch against the beginnings of a neglect of this duty. Persons who
   have for a time practiced this duty, and afterwards neglect it,
   commonly leave it off by degrees. While their convictions and religious
   affections last, they are very constant in their closets, and no
   worldly business, or company, or diversion hinders them. But as their
   convictions and affections begin to die away, they begin to find
   excuses to neglect it sometimes. They are now so hurried; they have now
   such and such things to attend to; or there are now such inconveniences
   in the way, that they persuade themselves they may very excusably omit
   it for this time. Afterwards it pretty frequently so happens, that they
   have something to hinder, something which they call a just excuse.
   After a while, a less thing becomes a sufficient excuse than was
   allowed to be such at first. Thus the person by degrees contracts more
   and more of an habit of neglecting prayer, and becomes more and more
   indisposed to it. And even when he doth perform it, it is in such a
   poor, dull, heartless, miserable manner, that he says to himself, he
   might as well not do it at all, as do it so. Thus he makes his own
   dullness and indisposition an excuse for wholly neglecting it, or at
   least for living in a great measure in the neglect of it. After this
   manner do Satan and men's own corruptions inveigle them to their ruin.

   Therefore beware of the first beginnings of a neglect: Watch against
   temptations to it: Take heed how you begin to allow of excuses. Be
   watchful to keep up the duty in the height of it; let it not so much as
   begin to sink. For when you give way, though it be but little, it is
   like giving way to an enemy in the field of battle; the first beginning
   of a retreat greatly encourages the enemy, and weakens the retreating
   soldiers.

   2. Let me direct you to forsake all such practices as you find by
   experience do indispose you to the duty of secret prayer. Examine the
   things in which you have allowed yourselves, and inquire whether they
   have had this effect. You are able to look over your past behavior, and
   may doubtless, on an impartial consideration, make a judgment of the
   practices and courses in which you have allowed yourselves.

   Particularly let young people examine their manner of company keeping,
   and the round of diversions in which, with their companions, they have
   allowed themselves. I only desire that you would ask at the mouth of
   your own consciences what has been the effect of these things with
   respect to your attendance on the duty of secret prayer. Have you not
   found that such practices have tended to the neglect of this duty? Have
   you not found that after them you have been more indisposed to it, and
   less conscientious and careful to attend it? Yea have they not from,
   time to time, actually been the means of your neglecting it?

   If you cannot deny that this is really the case, then, if you seek the
   good of your souls, forsake these practices. Whatever you may plead for
   them, as that there is no hurt in them, or that there is a time for all
   things, and the like; yet if you find this hurt in the consequence of
   them, it is time for you to forsake them. And if you value heaven more
   than a little worldly diversion; if you set an higher price on eternal
   glory than on a dance or a song, you will forsake them.

   If these things be lawful in themselves, yet if your experience show,
   that they are attended with such a consequence as I have now mentioned,
   that is enough. It is lawful in itself for you to enjoy your right hand
   and your right eye: But if, by experience, you find they cause you to
   offend, it is time for you to cut off the one, and pluck out the other,
   as you would rather go to heaven without them than go to hell with
   them, into that place of torment where the worm dieth not, and the fire
   is not quenched.
     __________________________________________________________________

THE JUSTICE OF GOD IN THE DAMNATION OF SINNERS

    Romans 3:19 -- That every mouth may be stopped.
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE main subject of the doctrinal part of this epistle, is the free
   grace of God in the salvation of men by Christ Jesus; especially as it
   appears in the doctrine of justification by faith alone. And the more
   clearly to evince this doctrine, and show the reason of it, the
   apostle, in the first place, establishes that point, that no flesh
   living can be justified by the deeds of the law. And to prove it, he is
   very large and particular in showing, that all mankind, not only the
   Gentiles, but Jews, are under sin, and so under the condemnation of the
   law; which is what he insists upon from the beginning of the epistle to
   this place. He first begins with the Gentiles; and in the first chapter
   shows that they are under sin, by setting forth the exceeding
   corruptions and horrid wickedness that overspread the Gentile world:
   and then through the second chapter, and the former part of this third
   chapter, to the text and following verse, he shows the same of the
   Jews, that they also are in the same circumstances with the Gentiles in
   this regard. They had a high thought of themselves, because they were
   God's covenant people, and circumcised, and the children of Abraham.
   They despised the Gentiles as polluted, condemned, and accursed; but
   looked on themselves, on account of their external privileges, and
   ceremonial and moral righteousness, as a pure and holy people, and the
   children of God; as the apostle observes in the second chapter. It was
   therefore strange doctrine to them, that they also were unclean and
   guilty in God's sight, and under the condemnation and curse of the law.
   The apostle does therefore, on account of their strong prejudices
   against such doctrine, the more particularly insists upon it, and shows
   that they are no better than the Gentiles; and as in the 9th verse of
   this chapter, "What then? Are we better than they? No, in no wise; for
   we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under
   sin." And, to convince them of it, he then produces certain passages
   out of their own law, or the Old Testament, (to whose authority they
   pretend a great regard,) from the ninth verse to our text. And it may
   be observed, that the apostle, first, cites certain passages to prove
   that all mankind are corrupt, (verses 10-12.) "As it is written, there
   is none righteous, no not one: There is none that understandeth, there
   is none that seeketh after God: They are all gone out of the way, they
   are together become unprofitable, there is none that doeth good, no not
   one." Secondly, the passages he cites next, are to prove, that not only
   all are corrupt, but each one wholly corrupt, as it were all over
   unclean, from the crown of the head to the soles of his feet; and
   therefore several particular parts of thebody are mentioned, the
   throat, the tongue, the lips, the mouth, the feet, (verses 13-15.)
   "Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used
   deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips; whose mouth is full of
   cursing and bitterness: their feet are swift to shed blood." And,
   Thirdly, he quotes other passages to show, that each one is not only
   all over corrupt, but corrupt to a desperate degree, by affirming the
   most pernicious tendency of their wickedness; "Destruction and misery
   are in their ways." And then by denying all goodness or godliness in
   them; "And the way of peace have they not known: There is no fear of
   God before their eyes." And then, lest the Jews should think these
   passages of their law do not concern them, and only the Gentiles are
   intended in them, the apostle shows in the text, not only that they are
   not exempt, but that they especially must be understood: "Now we know
   that whatsoever things the law saith, it saith to them who are under
   the law." By those that are under the law is meant the Jews; and the
   Gentiles by those that are without law; as appears by the 12th verse of
   the preceding chapter. There is a special reason to understand the law,
   as speaking to and of them, to whom it was immediately given. And
   therefore the Jews would be unreasonable in exempting themselves. And
   if we examine the places of the Old Testament whence these passages are
   taken, we shall see plainly that special respect is had to the
   wickedness of the people of that nation, in every one of them. So that
   the law shuts all up in universal and desperate wickedness, that every
   mouth may be stopped; the mouths of the Jews, as well as of the
   Gentiles, notwithstanding all those privileges by which they were
   distinguished from the Gentiles.

   The things that the law says, are sufficient to stop the mouths of all
   mankind, in two respects.

   1. To stop them from boasting of their righteousness, as the Jews were
   wont to do; as the apostle observes in the 23rd verse of the preceding
   chapter.- That the apostle has respect to stopping their mouths in this
   respect, appears by the 27th verse of the context, "Where is boasting
   then? It is excluded." The law stops our mouths from making any plea
   for life, or the favor of God, or any positive good, from our own
   righteousness.

   2. To stop them from making any excuse for ourselves, or objection
   against the execution of the sentence of the law, or the infliction of
   the punishment that it threatens. That it is intended, appears by the
   words immediately following, "That all the world may become guilty
   before God." That is, that they may appear to be guilty, and stand
   convicted before God, and justly liable to the condemnation of his law,
   as guilty of death, according to the Jewish way of speaking.

   And thus the apostle proves, that no flesh can be justified in God's
   sight by the deeds of the law; as he draws the conclusion in the
   following verse; and so prepares the way for establishing of the great
   doctrine of justification by faith alone, which he proceeds to do in
   the following part of the chapter, and of the epistle.

  DOCTRINE

   "It is just with God eternally to cast off and destroy sinners."- For
   this is the punishment which the law condemns to- The truth of this
   doctrine may appear by the joint consideration of two things, viz.
   Man's sinfulness, and God's sovereignty.

   I. It appears from the consideration of man's sinfulness. And that
   whether we consider the infinitely evil nature of all sin, or how much
   sin men are guilty of.

   1. If we consider the infinite evil and heinousness of sin in general,
   it is not unjust in God to inflict what punishment is deserved; because
   the very notion of deserving any punishment is, that it may be justly
   inflicted. A deserved punishment and a just punishment are the same
   thing. To say that one deserves such a punishment, and yet to say that
   he does not justly deserve it, is a contradiction; and if he justly
   deserves it, then it may be justly inflicted.

   Every crime or fault deserves a greater or less punishment, in
   proportion as the crime itself is greater or less. If any fault
   deserves punishment, then so much the greater the fault, so much the
   greater is the punishment deserved. The faulty nature of any thing is
   the formal ground and reason of its desert of punishment; and therefore
   the more any thing hath of this nature, the more punishment it
   deserves. And therefore the terribleness of the degree of punishment,
   let it be never be so terrible, is no argument against the justice of
   it, if the proportion does but hold between the heinousness of the
   crime and the dreadfulness of the punishment; so that if there be any
   such thing as a fault infinitely heinous, it will follow that it is
   just to inflict a punishment for it that is infinitely dreadful.

   A crime is more or less heinous, according as we are under greater or
   less obligations to the contrary. This is self-evident; because it is
   herein that the criminalness or faultiness of any thing consists, that
   it is contrary to what we are obliged or bound to, or what ought to be
   in us. So the faultiness of one being hating another, is in proportion
   to his obligation to love him. The crime of one being despising and
   casting contempt on another, is proportionably more or less heinous, as
   he was under greater or less obligations to honour him. The fault of
   disobeying another, is greater or less, as any one is under greater or
   less obligations to obey him. And therefore if there be any being that
   we are under infinite obligations to love, and honour, and obey, the
   contrary towards him must be infinitely faulty.
   Our obligation to love, honour, and obey any being, is in proportion to
   his loveliness, honourableness, and authority; for that is the very
   meaning of the words. When we say any one is very lovely, it is the
   same as to say, that he is one very much to be loved. Or if we say such
   a one is more honourable than another, the meaning of the words is,
   that he is one that we are more obliged to honour. If we say any one
   has great authority over us, it is the same as to say, that he has
   great right to our subjection and obedience.

   But God is a being infinitely lovely, because he hath infinite
   excellency and beauty. To have infinite excellency and beauty, is the
   same thing as to have infinite loveliness. He is a being of infinite
   greatness, majesty, and glory; and therefore he is infinitely
   honourable. He is infinitely exalted above the greatest potentates of
   the earth, and highest angels in heaven; and therefore he is infinitely
   more honourable than they. His authority over us is infinite; and the
   ground of his right to our obedience is infinitely strong; for he is
   infinitely worthy to be obeyed himself, and we have an absolute,
   universal, and infinite dependence upon him.

   So that sin against God, being a violation of infinite obligations,
   must be a crime infinitely heinous, and so deserving of infinite
   punishment.- Nothing is more agreeable to the common sense of mankind,
   than that sins committed against any one, must be proportionably
   heinous to the dignity of the being offended and abused; as it is also
   agreeable to the word of God, I Samuel 2:25. "If one man sin against
   another, the judge shall judge him;" (i.e. shall judge him, and inflict
   a finite punishment, such as finite judges can inflict;) "but if a man
   sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?" This was the
   aggravation of sin that made Joseph afraid of it. Genesis 39:9. "How
   shall I commit this great wickedness, and sin against God?" This was
   the aggravation of David's sin, in comparison of which he esteemed all
   others as nothing, because they were infinitely exceeded by it. Psalm
   51:4. "Against thee, thee only have I sinned."-The eternity of the
   punishment of ungodly men renders it infinite: and it renders it no
   more than infinite; and therefore renders no more than proportionable
   to the heinousness of what they are guilty of.

   If there be any evil or faultiness in sin against God, there is
   certainly infinite evil: for if it be any fault at all, it has an
   infinite aggravation, viz. that it is against an infinite object. If it
   be ever so small upon other accounts, yet if it be any thing, it has
   one infinite dimension; and so is an infinite evil. Which may be
   illustrated by this: if we suppose a thing to have infinite length, but
   no breadth and thickness, (a mere mathematical line,) it is nothing:
   but if it have any breadth and thickness, though never so small, and
   infinite length, the quantity of it is infinite; it exceeds the
   quantity of any thing, however broad, thick, and long, wherein these
   dimensions are all finite.

   So that the objections made against the infinite punishment of sin,
   from the necessity, or rather previous certainty, of the futurition of
   sin, arising from the unavoidable original corruption of nature, if
   they argue any thing, argue against any faultiness at all: for if this
   necessity or certainty leaves any evil at all in sin, that fault must
   be infinite by reason of the infinite object.

   But every such objector as would argue from hence, that there is no
   fault at all in sin, confutes himself, and shows his own insincerity in
   his objection. For at the same time that he objects, that men's acts
   are necessary, and that this kind of necessity is inconsistent with
   faultiness in the act, his own practice shows that he does not believe
   what he objects to be true: otherwise why does he at all blame men? Or
   why are such persons at all displeased with men, for abusive,
   injurious, and ungrateful acts towards them? Whatever they pretend, by
   this they show that indeed they do believe that there is no necessity
   in men's acts that is inconsistent with blame. And if their objection
   be this, that this previous certainty is by God's own ordering, and
   that where God orders an antecedent certainty of acts, he transfers all
   the fault from the actor on himself; their practice shows, that at the
   same time they do not believe this, but fully believe the contrary: for
   when they are abused by men, they are displeased with men, and not with
   God only.

   The light of nature teaches all mankind, that when an injury is
   voluntary, it is faulty, without any consideration of what there might
   be previously to determine the futurition of that evil act of the will.
   And it really teaches this as much to those that object and cavil most
   as to others; as their universal practice shows. By which it appears,
   that such objections are insincere and perverse. Men will mention
   others' corrupt nature when they are injured, as a thing that
   aggravates their crime, and that wherein their faultiness partly
   consists. How common is it for persons, when they look on themselves
   greatly injured by another, to inveigh against him, and aggravate his
   baseness, by saying, "He is a man of a most perverse spirit: he is
   naturally of a selfish, niggardly, or proud and haughty temper: he is
   one of a base and vile disposition." And yet men's natural and corrupt
   dispositions are mentioned as an excuse for them, with respect to their
   sins against God, as if they rendered them blameless.

   2. That it is just with God eternally to cast off wicked men, may more
   abundantly appear, if we consider how much sin they are guilty of. From
   what has been already said, it appears, that if men were guilty of sin
   but in one particular, that is sufficient ground of their eternal
   rejection and condemnation. If they are sinners, that is enough. Merely
   this, might be sufficient to keep them from ever lifting up their
   heads, and cause them to smite on their breasts, with the publican that
   cried, "God be merciful to me a sinner." But sinful men are full of
   sin; full of principles and acts of sin: their guilt is like great
   mountains, heaped one upon another, till the pile is grown up to
   heaven. They are totally corrupt, in every part, in all their
   faculties, and all the principles of their nature, their
   understandings, and wills; and in all their dispositions and
   affections. Their heads, their hearts, are totally depraved; all the
   members of their bodies are only instruments of sin; and all their
   senses, seeing, hearing, tasting, &c. are only inlets and outlets of
   sin, channels of corruption. There is nothing but sin, no good at all.
   Romans. 7:18. "In me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing."
   There is all manner of wickedness. There are the seeds of the greatest
   and blackest crimes. There are principles of all sorts of wickedness
   against men; and there is all wickedness against God. There is pride;
   there is enmity; there is contempt; there is quarreling; there is
   atheism; there is blasphemy. There are these things in exceeding
   strength; the heart is under the power of them, is sold under sin, and
   is a perfect slave to it. There is hard-heartedness, hardness greater
   than that of a rock, or an adamant-stone. There is obstinacy and
   perverseness, incorrigibleness and inflexibleness in sin, that will not
   be overcome by threatenings or promises, by awakenings or
   encouragements, by judgments or mercies, neither by that which is
   terrifying nor that which is winning. The very blood of God our Saviour
   will not win the heart of a wicked man.

   And there are actual wickednesses without number or measure. There are
   breaches of every command, in thought, word, and deed: a life full of
   sin; days and nights filled up with sin; mercies abused and frowns
   despised; mercy and justice, and all the divine perfections, trampled
   on; and the honour of each person in the Trinity trod in the dirt. Now
   if one sinful word or thought has so much evil in it, as to deserve
   eternal destruction, how do they deserve to be eternally cast off and
   destroyed, that are guilty of so much sin!

   II. If with man's sinfulness, we consider God's sovereignty, it may
   serve further to clear God's justice in the eternal rejection and
   condemnation of sinners, from men's cavils and objections. I shall not
   now pretend to determine precisely, what things are, and what things
   are not, proper acts and exercises of God's holy sovereignty; but only,
   that God's sovereignty extends to the following things.

   1. That such is God's sovereign power and right, that he is originally
   under no obligation to keep men from sinning; but may in his providence
   permit and leave them to sin. He was not obliged to keep either angels
   or men from falling. It is unreasonable to suppose, that God should be
   obliged, if he makes a reasonable creature capable of knowing his will,
   and receiving a law from him, and being subject to his moral
   government, at the same time to make it impossible for him to sin, or
   break his law. For if God be obliged to this, it destroys all use of
   any commands, laws, promises, or threatenings, and the very notion of
   any moral government of God over those reasonable creatures. For to
   what purpose would it be, for God to give such and such laws, and
   declare his holy will to a creature, and annex promises and
   threatenings to move him to his duty, and make him careful to perform
   it, if the creature at the same time has this to think of, that God is
   obliged to make it impossible for him to break his laws? How can God's
   threatenings move to care or watchfulness, when, at the same time, God
   is obliged to render it impossible that he should be exposed to the
   threatenings? Or, to what purpose is it for God to give a law at all?
   For according to this supposition, it is God, and not the creature,
   that is under the law. It is the lawgiver's care, and not the
   subject's, to see that his law is obeyed; and this care is what the
   lawgiver is absolutely obliged to! If God be obliged never to permit a
   creature to fall, there is an end of all divine laws, or government, or
   authority of God over the creature; there can be no manner of use of
   these things.

   God may permit sin, though the being of sin will certainly ensue on
   that permission: and so, by permission, he may dispose and order the
   event. If there were any such thing as chance, or mere contingence, and
   the very notion of it did not carry a gross absurdity, (as might easily
   be shown that it does,) it would have been very unfit that God should
   have left it to mere chance, whether man should fall or no. For chance,
   if there should be any such thing, is undesigning and blind. And
   certainly it is more fit that an event of so great importance, and that
   is attended with such an infinite train of great consequences, should
   be disposed and ordered by infinite wisdom, than that it should be left
   to blind chance.

   If it be said, that God need not have interposed to render it
   impossible for man to sin, and yet not leave it to mere contingence or
   blind chance neither; but might have left it with man's free will, to
   determine whether to sin or no: I answer, if God did leave it to man's
   free will, without any sort of disposal, or ordering [or rather,
   adequate cause] in the case, whence it should be previously certain how
   that free will should determine, then still that first determination of
   the will must be merely contingent or by chance. It could not have any
   antecedent act of the will to determine it; for I speak now of the very
   first act of motion of the will, respecting the affair that may be
   looked upon as the prime ground and highest source of the event. To
   suppose this to be determined by a foregoing act is a contradiction.
   God's disposing this determination of the will by his permission, does
   not at all infringe the liberty of the creature: it is in no respect
   any more inconsistent with liberty, than mere chance or contingence.
   For if the determination of the will be from blind, undesigning chance,
   it is no more from the agent himself, or from the will itself, than if
   we suppose, in the case, a wise, divine disposal by permission.

   2. It was fit that it should be at the ordering of the divine wisdom
   and good pleasure, whether every particular man should stand for
   himself, or whether the first father of mankind should be appointed as
   the moral and federal head and representative of the rest. If God has
   not liberty in this matter to determine either of these two as he
   pleases, it must be because determining that the first father of men
   should represent the rest, and not that every one should stand for
   himself, is injurious to mankind. For if it be not injurious, how is it
   unjust? But it is not injurious to mankind; for there is nothing in the
   nature of the case itself, that makes it better that each man should
   stand for himself, than that all should be represented by their common
   father; as the least reflection or consideration will convince any one.
   And if there be nothing in the nature of the thing that makes the
   former better for mankind than the latter, then it will follow, that
   they are not hurt in God's choosing and appointing the latter, rather
   than the former; or, which is the same thing, that it is not injurious
   to mankind.

   3. When men are fallen, and become sinful, God by his sovereignty has a
   right to determine about their redemption as he pleases. He has a right
   to determine whether he will redeem any or not. He might, if he had
   pleased, have left all to perish, or might have redeemed all. Or, he
   may redeem some, and leave others; and if he doth so, he may take whom
   he pleases, and leave whom he pleases. To suppose that all have
   forfeited his favor, and deserved to perish, and to suppose that he may
   not leave any one individual of them to perish, implies a
   contradiction; because it supposes that such a one has a claim to God's
   favor, and is not justly liable to perish; which is contrary to the
   supposition.

   It is meet that God should order all these things according to his own
   pleasure. By reason of his greatness and glory, by which he is
   infinitely above all, he is worthy to be sovereign, and that his
   pleasure should in all things take place. He is worthy that he should
   make himself his end, and that he should make nothing but his own
   wisdom his rule in pursuing that end, without asking leave or counsel
   of any, and without giving account of any of his matters. It is fit
   that he who is absolutely perfect, and infinitely wise, and the
   Fountain of all wisdom, should determine every thing [that he effects]
   by his own will, even things of the greatest importance. It is meet
   that he should be thus sovereign, because he is the first being, the
   eternal being, whence all other beings are. He is the Creator of all
   things; and all are absolutely and universally dependent on him; and
   therefore it is meet that he should act as the sovereign possessor of
   heaven and earth.

  APPLICATION

   In the improvement of this doctrine, I would chiefly direct myself to
   sinners who are afraid of damnation, in a use of conviction. This may
   be matter of conviction to you, that it would be just and righteous
   with God eternally to reject and destroy you. This is what you are in
   danger of. You who are a Christless sinner are a poor condemned
   creature: God's wrath still abides upon you; and the sentence of
   condemnation lies upon you. You are in God's hands, and it is uncertain
   what he will do with you. You are afraid what will become of you. You
   are afraid that it will be your portion to suffer eternal burnings; and
   your fears are not without grounds; you have reason to tremble every
   moment. But be you never so much afraid of it, let eternal damnation be
   never so dreadful, yet it is just. God may nevertheless do it, and be
   righteous, and holy, and glorious. Though eternal damnation be what you
   cannot bear, and how much soever your heart shrinks at the thought of
   it, yet God's justice may be glorious in it. The dreadfulness of the
   thing on your part, and the greatness of your dread of it, do not
   render it the less righteous on God's part. If you think otherwise, it
   is a sign that you do not see yourself, that you are not sensible what
   sin is, nor how much of it you have been guilty of. Therefore for your
   conviction, be directed,

   First, To look over your past life: inquire at the mouth of conscience,
   and hear what that has to testify concerning it. Consider what you are,
   what light you have had, and what means you have lived under: and yet
   how you have behaved yourself! What have those many days and nights you
   have lived been filled up with? How have those years that have rolled
   over your heads, one after another, been spent? What has the sun shone
   upon you for, from day to day, while you have improved his light to
   serve Satan by it? What has God kept your breath in your nostrils for,
   and given you meat and drink, that you have spent your life and
   strength, supported by them, in opposing God, and rebellion against
   him?

   How many sorts of wickedness have you not been guilty of! How manifold
   have been the abominations of your life! What profaneness and contempt
   of God has been exercised by you! How little regard have you had to the
   Scriptures, to the word preached, to sabbaths, and sacraments! How
   profanely have you talked, many of you, about those things that are
   holy! After what manner have many of you kept God's holy day, not
   regarding the holiness of the time, not caring what you thought of in
   it! Yea, you have not only spent the time in worldly, vain, and
   unprofitable thoughts, but in immoral thoughts; pleasing yourself with
   the reflection on past acts of wickedness, and in contriving new acts.
   Have not you spent much holy time in gratifying your lusts in your
   imaginations; yea, not only holy time, but the very time of God's
   public worship, when you have appeared in God's more immediate
   presence? How have you not only attended to the worship, but have in
   the mean time been feasting your lusts, and wallowing yourself in
   abominable uncleanness! How many sabbaths have you spent, one after
   another, in a most wretched manner! Some of you not only in worldly and
   wicked thoughts, but also a very wicked outward behavior! When you on
   sabbath-days have got along with your wicked companions, how has holy
   time been treated among you! What kind of conversation has there been!
   Yea, how have some of you, by a very indecent carriage, openly
   dishonored and cast contempt on the sacred services of God's house, and
   holy day! And what you have done some of you alone, what wicked
   practices there have been in secret, even in holy time, God and your
   own consciences know.

   And how have you behaved yourself in the time of family prayer! And
   what a trade have many of you made of absenting yourselves from the
   worship of the families you belong to, for the sake of vain company!
   And how have you continued in the neglect of secret prayer! Therein
   wilfully living in a known sin, going abreast against as plain a
   command as any in the Bible! Have you not been one that has cast off
   fear, and restrained prayer before God?

   What wicked carriage have some of you been guilty of towards your
   parents! How far have you been from paying that honour to them which
   God has required! Have you not even harboured ill-will and malice
   towards them? And when they have displeased you, have wished evil to
   them? yea, and shown your vile spirit in your behavior? and it is well
   if you have not mocked them behind their backs; and, like the cursed
   Ham and Canaan, as it were, derided your parents' nakedness instead of
   covering it, and hiding your eyes from it. Have not some of you often
   disobeyed your parents, yea, and refused to be subject to them? Is it
   not a wonder of mercy and forbearance, that the proverb has not before
   now been accomplished on you, Proverbs 30:17. "The eye that mocketh at
   his father, and refuseth to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley
   shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it."

   What revenge and malice have you been guilty of towards your neighbors!
   How have you indulged this spirit of the devil, hating others, and
   wishing evil to them, rejoicing when evil befell them, and grieving at
   others' prosperity, and lived in such a way for a long time! Have not
   some of you allowed a passionate furious spirit, and behaved yourselves
   in your anger more like wild beasts than like Christians?

   What covetousness has been in many of you! Such has been your
   inordinate love of the world, and care about the things of it, that it
   has taken up your heart; you have allowed no room for God and religion;
   you have minded the world more than your eternal salvation. For the
   vanities of the world you have neglected reading, praying and
   meditation; for the things of the world, you have broken the sabbath:
   for the world you have spent a great deal of your time in quarreling.
   For the world you have envied and hated your neighbor; for the world
   you have cast God, and Christ, and heaven, behind your back; for the
   world you have sold your own soul. You have as it were drowned your
   soul in worldly cares and desires; you have been a mere earth-worm,
   that is never in its element but when grovelling and buried in the
   earth.

   How much of a spirit of pride has appeared in you, which is in a
   peculiar manner the spirit and condemnation of the devil! How have some
   of you vaunted yourselves in your apparel! others in their riches!
   others in their knowledge and abilities! How has it galled you to see
   others above you! How much has it gone against the grain for you to
   give others their due honour! And how have you shown your pride by
   setting up your wills and in opposing others, and stirring up and
   promoting division, and a party spirit in public affairs.

   How sensual have you been! Are there not some here that have debased
   themselves below the dignity of human nature, by wallowing in sensual
   filthiness, as swine in the mire, or as filthy vermin feeding with
   delight on rotten carrion? What intemperance have some of you been
   guilty of! How much of your precious time have you spent at the tavern,
   and in drinking companies, when you ought to have been at home seeking
   God and your salvation in your families and closets!

   And what abominable lasciviousness have some of you been guilty of! How
   have you indulged yourself from day to day, and from night to night, in
   all manner of unclean imaginations! Has not your soul been filled with
   them, till it has become a hold of foul spirits, and a cage of every
   unclean and hateful bird? What foul-mouthed persons have some of you
   been, often in lewd and lascivious talk and unclean songs, wherein were
   things not fit to be spoken! And such company, where such conversation
   has been carried on, has been your delight. And with what unclean acts
   and practices have you defiled yourself! God and your own consciences
   know what abominable lasciviousness you have practised in things not
   fit to be named, when you have been alone; when you ought to have been
   reading, or meditating, or on your knees before God in secret prayer.
   And how have you corrupted others, as well as polluted yourselves! What
   vile uncleanness have you practised in company! What abominations have
   you been guilty of in the dark! Such as the apostle doubtless had
   respect to in Ephesians 5:12. "For it is a shame even to speak of those
   things that are done of them in secret." Some of you have corrupted
   others, and done what in you lay to undo their souls, (if you have not
   actually done it;) and by your vile practices and example have made
   room for Satan, invited his presence, and established his interest, in
   the town where you have lived.
   What lying have some of you been guilty of, especially in your
   childhood! And have not your heart and lips often disagreed since you
   came to riper years? What fraud, and deceit, and unfaithfulness, have
   many of you practised in your own dealings with your neighbours, of
   which your own heart is conscious, if you have not been noted by
   others.

   And how have some of you behaved yourselves in your family relations!
   How have you neglected your children's souls! And not only so, but have
   corrupted their minds by your bad examples; and instead of training
   them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, have rather brought
   them up in the devil's service!

   How have some of you attended that sacred ordinance of the Lord's
   supper without any manner of serious preparation, and in a careless
   slighty frame of spirits, and chiefly to comply with custom! Have you
   not ventured to put the sacred symbols of the body and blood of Christ
   into your mouth, while at the same time you lived in ways of known
   sins, and intended no other than still to go on in the same wicked
   practices? And, it may be, have sat at the Lord's table with rancour in
   your heart against some of your brethren that you have sat there with.
   You have come even to that holy feast of love among God's children,
   with the leaven of malice and envy in your heart; and so have eaten and
   drank judgment to yourself.

   What stupidity and sottishness has attended your course of wickedness:
   which has appeared in your obstinacy under awakening dispensations of
   God's word and providence. And how have some of you backslidden after
   you have set out in religion, and quenched God's Spirit after he had
   been striving with you! And what unsteadiness, and slothfulness, and
   long misimprovement of God's strivings with you, have you been
   chargeable with!

   Now, can you think when you have thus behaved yourself, that God is
   obliged to show you mercy? Are you not after all this ashamed to talk
   of its being hard with God to cast you off? Does it become one who has
   lived such a life to open his mouth to excuse himself, to object
   against God's justice in his condemnation, or to complain of it as hard
   in God not to give him converting and pardoning grace, and make him his
   child, and bestow on him eternal life? Or to talk of his duties and
   great pains in religion, as if such performances were worthy to be
   accepted, and to draw God's heart to such a creature? If this has been
   your manner, does it not show how little you have considered yourself,
   and how little a sense you have had of your own sinfulness?

   Secondly, Be directed to consider, if God should eternally reject and
   destroy you, what an agreeableness and exact mutual answerableness
   there would be between God so dealing with you, and your spirit and
   behaviour. There would not only be an equality, but a similitude. God
   declares, that his dealings with men shall be suitable to their
   disposition and practice. Psalm 18:25, 26. "With the merciful man, thou
   wilt show thyself merciful; with an upright man, thou wilt show thyself
   upright; with the pure, thou wilt show thyself pure; and with the
   froward, thou wilt show thyself froward." How much soever you dread
   damnation, and are affrighted and concerned at the thoughts of it; yet
   if God should indeed eternally damn you, you would be met with but in
   your own way; you would be dealt with exactly according to your own
   dealing. Surely it is but fair that you should be made to buy in the
   same measure in which you sell.

   Here I would particularly show,- 1. That if God should eternally
   destroy you, it would be agreeable to your treatment of God. 2. That it
   would be agreeable to your treatment of Jesus Christ. 3. That it would
   be agreeable to your behaviour towards your neighbours. 4. That it
   would be according to your own foolish behaviour towards yourself.

   I. If God should for ever cast you off, it would be exactly agreeable
   to your treatment of him. That you may be sensible of this, consider,

   1. You never have exercised the least degree of love to God; and
   therefore it would be agreeable to your treatment of him, if he should
   never express any love to you. When God converts and saves a sinner, it
   is a wonderful and unspeakable manifestation of divine love. When a
   poor lost soul is brought home to Christ, and has all his sins forgiven
   him, and is made a child of God, it will take up a whole eternity to
   express and declare the greatness of that love. And why should God be
   obliged to express such wonderful love to you, who never exercised the
   least degree of love to him in all your life? You never have loved God,
   who is infinitely glorious and lovely; and why then is God under
   obligation to love you, who are all over deformed and loathsome as a
   filthy worm, or rather a hateful viper? You have no benevolence in your
   heart towards God; you never rejoiced in God's happiness; if he had
   been miserable, and that had been possible, you would have liked it as
   well as if he were happy; you would not have cared how miserable he
   was, nor mourned for it, any more than you now do for the devil's being
   miserable. And why then should God be looked upon as obliged to take so
   much care for your happiness, as to do such great things for it, as he
   doth for those that are saved? Or why should God be called hard, in
   case he should not be careful to save you from misery? You care not
   what becomes of God's glory; you are not distressed how much soever his
   honour seems to suffer in the world: and why should God care any more
   for your welfare? Has it not been so, that if you could but promote
   your private interest, and gratify your own lusts, you cared not how
   much the glory of God suffered? And why may not God advance his own
   glory in the ruin of your welfare, not caring how much your interest
   suffers by it? You never so much as stirred one step, sincerely making
   the glory of God your end, or acting from real respect to him: and why
   then is it hard if God doth not do such great things for you, as the
   changing of your nature, raising you from spiritual death to life,
   conquering the powers of darkness for you, translating you out of the
   kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of his dear Son, delivering you
   from eternal misery, and bestowing upon you eternal glory? You were not
   willing to deny yourself for God; you never cared to put yourself out
   of your way for Christ; whenever any thing cross or difficult came in
   your way, that the glory of God was concerned in, it has been your
   manner to shun it, and excuse yourself from it. You did not care to
   hurt yourself for Christ, whom you did not see worthy of it; and why
   then must it be looked upon as a hard and cruel thing, if Christ has
   not been pleased to spill his blood and be tormented to death for such
   a sinner.

   2. You have slighted God; and why then may not God justly slight you?
   When sinners are sensible in some measure of their misery, they are
   ready to think it hard that God will take no notice of them; that he
   will see them in such a lamentable distressed condition, beholding
   their burdens and tears, and seem to slight it, and manifest no pity to
   them. Their souls they think are precious: it would be a dreadful thing
   if they should perish, and burn in hell for ever. They do not see
   through it, that God should make so light of their salvation. But then,
   ought they not to consider, that as their souls are precious, so is
   God's honour precious? The honour of the infinite God, the great King
   of heaven and earth, is a thing of as great importance, (and surely may
   justly be so esteemed by God,) as the happiness of you, a poor little
   worm. But yet you have slighted that honour of God, and valued it no
   more than the dirt under your feet. You have been told that such and
   such things were contrary to the will of a holy God, and against his
   honour; but you cared not for that. God called upon you, and exhorted
   you to be more tender of his honour; but you went on without regarding
   him. Thus have you slighted God! And yet, is it hard that God should
   slight you? Are you more honourable than God, that he must be obliged
   to make much of you, how light soever you make of him and his glory?

   And you have not only slighted God in time past, but you slight him
   still. You indeed now make a pretence and show of honouring him in your
   prayers, and attendance on other external duties, and by sober
   countenance, and seeming devoutness in your words and behaviour; but it
   if all mere dissembling. That downcast look and seeming reverence, is
   not from any honour you have to God in your heart, though you would
   have God take it so. You who have not believed in Christ, have not the
   least jot of honour to God; that show of it is merely forced, and what
   you are driven to by fear, like those mentioned in Psalm 66:3. "Through
   the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves to
   thee." In the original it is, "shall lie unto thee;" that is, yield
   feigned submission, and dissemble respect and honour to thee. There is
   a rod held over you that makes you seem to pay such respect to God.
   This religion and devotion, even the very appearance of it, would soon
   be gone, and all vanish away, if that were removed. Sometimes it may be
   you weep in your prayers, and in your hearing sermons, and hope God
   will take notice of it, and take it for some honour; but he sees it to
   be all hypocrisy. You weep for yourself; you are afraid of hell; and do
   you think that is worthy of God to take much notice of you, because you
   can cry when you are in danger of being damned; when at the same time
   you indeed care nothing for God's honour.

   Seeing you thus disregard so great a God, is it a heinous thing for God
   to slight you, a little, wretched, despicable creature; a worm, a mere
   nothing, and less than nothing; a vile insect, that has risen up in
   contempt against the Majesty of heaven and earth?

   3. Why should God be looked upon as obliged to bestow salvation upon
   you, when you have been so ungrateful for the mercies he has bestowed
   upon you already? God has tried you with a great deal of kindness, and
   he never has sincerely been thanked by you for any of it. God has
   watched over you, and preserved you, and provided for you, and followed
   you with mercy all your days; and yet you have continued sinning
   against him. He has given you food and raiment, but you have improved
   both in the service of sin. He has preserved you while you slept; but
   when you arose, it was to return to the old trade of sinning. God,
   notwithstanding this ingratitude, has still continued his mercy; but
   his kindness has never won your heart, or brought you to a more
   grateful behaviour towards him. It may be you have received many
   remarkable mercies, recoveries from sickness, or preservations of your
   life when exposed by accidents, when if you had died, you would have
   gone directly to hell; but you never had any true thankfulness for any
   of these mercies. God has kept you out of hell, and continued your day
   of grace, and the offers of salvation, so long a time; while you did
   not regard your own salvation so much as in secret to ask God for it.
   And now God has greatly added to his mercy to you, by giving you the
   strivings of his Spirit, whereby a most precious opportunity for your
   salvation is in your hands. But what thanks has God received for it?
   What kind of returns have you made for all this kindness? As God has
   multiplied mercies, so have you multiplied provocations.

   And yet now are you ready to quarrel for mercy, and to find fault with
   God, not only that he does not bestow more mercy, but to contend with
   him, because he does not bestow infinite mercy upon you, heaven with
   all it contains, and even himself, for your eternal portion. What ideas
   have you of yourself, that you think God is obliged to do so much for
   you, though you treat him ever so ungratefully for his kindness
   wherewith you have been followed all the days of your life.

   4. You have voluntarily chosen to be with Satan in his enmity and
   opposition to God; how justly therefore might you be with him in his
   punishment! You did not choose to be on God's side, but rather chose to
   side with the devil, and have obstinately continued in it, against
   God's often repeated calls and counsels. You have chosen rather to
   hearken to Satan than to God, and would be with him in his work. You
   have given yourself up to him, to be subject to his power and
   government, in opposition to God; how justly therefore may God also
   give you up to him, and leave you in his power, to accomplish your
   ruin! Seeing you have yielded yourself to his will, to do as he would
   have you, surely God may leave you in his hands to execute his will
   upon you. If men will be with God's enemy, and on his side, why is God
   obliged to redeem them out of his hands, when they have done his work?
   Doubtless you would be glad to serve the devil, and be God's enemy
   while you live, and then to have God your friend, and deliver you from
   the devil, when you come to die. But will God be unjust if he deals
   otherwise by you? No, surely! It will be altogether and perfectly just,
   that you should have your portion with him with whom you have chosen to
   work; and that you should be in his possession to whose dominion you
   have yielded yourself; and if you cry to God for deliverance, he may
   most justly give you that answer. Judges 10:14. "Go to the gods which
   you have chosen."

   5. Consider how often you have refused to hear God's calls to you, and
   how just it would therefore be, if he should refuse to hear you when
   you call upon him. You are ready, it may be, to complain that you have
   often prayed, and earnestly begged of God to show you mercy, and yet
   have no answer of prayer: One says, I have been constant in prayer for
   so many years, and God has not heard me. Another says, I have done what
   I can; I have prayed as earnestly as I am able; I do not see how I can
   do more; and it will seem hard if after all I am denied. But do you
   consider how often God has called, and you have denied him? God has
   called earnestly, and for a long time; he has called and called again
   in his word, and in his providence, and you have refused. You was not
   uneasy for fear you should not show regard enough to his calls. You let
   him call as loud and as long as he would; for your part, you had no
   leisure to attend to what he said; you had other business to mind; you
   had these and those lusts to gratify and please, and worldly concerns
   to attend; you could not afford to stand considering of what God had to
   say to you. When the ministers of Christ have stood and pleaded with
   you, in his name, sabbath after sabbath, and have even spent their
   strength in it, how little was you moved! It did not alter you, but you
   went on still as you used to do; when you went away, you returned again
   to your sins, to your lasciviousness, to your vain mirth, to your
   covetousness, to your intemperance, and that has been the language of
   your heart and practice, Exodus 5:2. "Who is the Lord, that I should
   obey his voice?" Was it no crime for you to refuse to hear when God
   called? And yet is it now very hard that God does not hear your earnest
   calls, and that though your calling on God be not from any respect to
   him, but merely from self-love? The devil would beg as earnestly as
   you, if he had any hope to get salvation by it, and a thousand times as
   earnestly, and yet be as much of a devil as he is now. Are your calls
   more worthy to be heard than God's? Or is God more obliged to regard
   what you say to him, than you to regard his commands, counsels, and
   invitations to you? What can be more justice than this, Proverbs 1:24,
   &c. "Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my
   hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at nought all my counsel,
   and would none of my reproof: I will also laugh at your calamity, I
   will mock when your fear cometh; when your fear cometh as desolation,
   and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish
   cometh upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer;
   they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me."

   6. Have you not taken encouragement to sin against God, on that very
   presumption, that God would show you mercy when you sought it? And may
   not God justly refuse you that mercy that you have so presumed upon?
   You have flattered yourself, that though you did so, yet God would show
   you mercy when you cried earnestly to him for it: how righteous
   therefore would it be in God, to disappoint such a wicked presumption!
   It was upon that very hope that you dared to affront the majesty of
   heaven so dreadfully as you have done; and can you now be so sottish as
   to think that God is obliged not to frustrate that hope?

   When a sinner takes encouragement to neglect secret prayer which God
   has commanded, to gratify his lusts, to live a carnal vain life, to
   thwart God, to run upon him, and contemn him to his face, thinking with
   himself, "If I do so, God would not damn me; he is a merciful God, and
   therefore when I seek his mercy he will bestow it upon me;" must God be
   accounted hard because he will not do according to such a sinner's
   presumption?

   Cannot he be excused from showing such a sinner mercy when he is
   pleased to seek it, without incurring the charge of being unjust; if
   this be the case, God has no liberty to vindicate his own honour and
   majesty; but must lay himself open to all manner of affronts, and yield
   himself up to the abuse of vile men, though they disobey, despise, and
   dishonour him, as much as they will; and when they have done, his mercy
   and pardoning grace must not be in his own power and at his own
   disposal, but he must be obliged to dispense it at their call. He must
   take these bold and vile contemners of his majesty, when it suits them
   to ask it, and must forgive all their sins, and not only so, but must
   adopt them into his family, and make them his children, and bestow
   eternal glory upon them. What mean, low, and strange thoughts have such
   men of God, who think thus of him! Consider, that you have injured God
   the more, and have been the worse enemy to him, for his being a
   merciful God. So have you treated that attribute of God's mercy! How
   just is it therefore that you never should have any benefit of that
   attribute!

   There is something peculiarly heinous in sinning against the mercy of
   God more than other attributes. There is such base and horrid
   ingratitude, in being the worse to God because he is a being of
   infinite goodness and grace, that it above all things renders
   wickedness vile and detestable. This ought to win us, and engage us to
   serve God better; but instead of that, to sin against him the more, has
   something inexpressibly bad in it, and does in a peculiar manner
   enhance guilt, and incense wrath; as seems to be intimated, Romans 2:4,
   5. "Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
   long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to
   repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up
   unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the
   righteous judgment of God."

   The greater the mercy of God is, the more should you be engaged to love
   him, and live to his glory. But it has been contrariwise with you; the
   consideration of the mercies of God being so exceeding great, is the
   thing wherewith you have encouraged yourself in sin. You have heard
   that the mercy of God was without bounds, that it was sufficient to
   pardon the greatest sinner, and you have upon that very account
   ventured to be a very great sinner. Though it was very offensive to
   God, though you heard that God infinitely hated sin, and that such
   practices as you went on in were exceeding contrary to his nature,
   will, and glory, yet that did not make you uneasy; you heard that he
   was a very merciful God, and had grace enough to pardon you, and so
   cared not how offensive your sins were to him. How long have some of
   you gone on in sin, and what great sins have some of you been guilty
   of, on that presumption! Your own conscience can give testimony to it,
   that this has made you refuse God's calls, and has made you regardless
   of his repeated commands. Now, how righteous would it be if God should
   swear in his wrath, that you should never be the better for his being
   infinitely merciful!

   Your ingratitude has been the greater, that you have not only abused
   the attribute of God's mercy, taking encouragement from it to continue
   in sin, but you have also presumed that God would exercise infinite
   mercy to you in particular; which consideration should have especially
   endeared God to you. You have taken encouragement to sin the more, from
   that consideration, that Christ came into the would and died to save
   sinners; such thanks has Christ had from you, for enduring such a
   tormenting death for his enemies! Now, how justly might God refuse that
   you should ever be the better for his Son's laying down his life! It
   was because of these things that you put off seeking salvation. You
   would take the pleasures of sin still longer, hardening yourself
   because mercy was infinite, and it would not be too late, if you sought
   it afterwards; now, how justly may God disappoint you in this, and so
   order it that it shall be too late!

   7. How have some of you risen up against God, and in the frame of your
   minds opposed him in his sovereign dispensations! And how justly upon
   that account might God oppose you, and set himself against you! You
   never yet would submit to God; never willingly comply, that God should
   have dominion over the world, and that he should govern it for his own
   glory, according to his own wisdom. You, a poor worm, a potsherd, a
   broken piece of an earthen vessel, have dared to find fault and quarrel
   with God. Isaiah 45:9. "Woe to him that striveth with his Maker. Let
   the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth: shall the clay say
   to him that fashioned it, What makest thou?" But yet you have ventured
   to do it. Romans 9:20. "Who art thou, O man, that repliest against
   God?" But yet you have thought you was big enough; you have taken upon
   you to call God to an account, why he does thus and thus; you have said
   to Jehovah, What dost thou?

   If you have been restrained by fear from openly venting your opposition
   and enmity of heart against God's government, yet it has been in you;
   you have not been quiet in the frame of your mind; you have had the
   heart of a viper within, and have been ready to spit your venom at God.
   It is well if sometimes you have not actually done it, by tolerating
   blasphemous thoughts and malignant risings of heart against him; yea,
   and the frame of your heart in some measure appeared in impatient and
   fretful behaviour.- Now, seeing you have thus opposed God, how just is
   it that God should oppose you! Or is it because you are so much better,
   and so much greater than God, that it is a crime for him to make that
   opposition against you which you make against him? Do you think that
   the liberty of making opposition is your exclusive prerogative, so that
   you may be an enemy to God, but God must by no means be an enemy to
   you, but must be looked upon under obligation nevertheless to help you,
   and save you by his blood, and bestow his best blessings upon you?

   Consider how in the frame of your mind you have thwarted God in those
   very exercises of mercy towards others that you are seeking for
   yourself. God exercising his infinite grace towards your neighbours,
   has put you into an ill frame, and it may be, set you into a tumult of
   mind. How justly therefore may God refuse ever to exercise that mercy
   towards you! Have you not thus opposed God showing mercy to others,
   even at the very time when you pretended to be earnest with God for
   pity and help for yourself? Yea, and while you was endeavouring to get
   something wherewith to recommend yourself to God? And will you look to
   God still with a challenge of mercy, and contend with him for it
   notwithstanding? Can you who have such a heart, and have thus behaved
   yourself, come to God for any other than mere sovereign mercy?

   II. If you should for ever be cast off by God, it would be agreeable to
   your treatment of Jesus Christ. It would have been just with God if he
   had cast you off for ever, without ever making you the offer of a
   Saviour. But God hath not done that; he has provided a Saviour for
   sinners, and offered him to you, even his own Son Jesus Christ, who is
   the only Saviour of men. All that are not for ever cast off are saved
   by him. God offers men salvation through him, and has promised us, that
   if we come to him, we shall not be cast off. But if you have treated,
   and still treat, this Saviour after such a manner, that if you should
   be eternally cast off by God, it would be most agreeable to your
   behaviour towards him; which appears by this, viz. "That you reject
   Christ, and will not have him for your Saviour."

   If God offers you a Saviour from deserved punishment, and you will not
   receive him, then surely it is just that you should go without a
   Saviour. Or is God obliged, because you do not like this Saviour, to
   provide you another? He has given an infinitely honourable and glorious
   person, even his only begotten Son, to be a sacrifice for sin, and so
   provided salvation; and this Saviour is offered to you: now if you
   refuse to accept him, is God therefore unjust if he does not save you?
   Is he obliged to save you in a way of your own choosing, because you do
   not like the way of his choosing? Or will you charge Christ with
   injustice because he does not become your Saviour, when at the same
   time you will not have him when he offers himself to you, and beseeches
   you to accept of him as your Saviour?

   I am sensible that by this time many persons are ready to object
   against this. If all should speak what they now think, we should hear a
   murmuring all over the meeting-house, and one and another would say, "I
   cannot see how this can be, that I am not willing that Christ should be
   my Saviour, when I would give all the world that he was my Saviour: how
   is it possible that I should not be willing to have Christ for my
   Saviour when this is what I am seeking after, and praying for, and
   striving for, as for my life?"

   Here therefore I would endeavour to convince you, that you are under a
   gross mistake in this matter. And, First, I would endeavour to show the
   grounds of your mistake. And Secondly, To demonstrate to you, that you
   have rejected, and do wilfully reject, Jesus Christ.

   First, That you may see the weak grounds of your mistake, consider,

   1. There is a great deal of difference between a willingness not to be
   damned, and a being willing to receive Christ for your Savior. You have
   the former; there is no doubt of that: nobody supposes that you love
   misery so as to choose an eternity of it; and so doubtless you are
   willing to be saved from eternal misery. But that is a very different
   thing from being willing to come to Christ: persons very commonly
   mistake the one for the other, but they are quite two things. You may
   love the deliverance, but hate the deliverer. You tell of a
   willingness; but consider what is the object of that willingness. It
   does not respect Christ; the way of salvation by him is not at all the
   object of it; but it is wholly terminated on your escape from misery.
   The inclination of your will goes no further than self, it never
   reaches Christ. You are willing not to be miserable; that is, you love
   yourself, and there your will and choice terminate. And it is but a
   vain pretence and delusion to say or think, that you are willing to
   accept of Christ.

   2. There is certainly a great deal of difference between a forced
   compliance and a free willingness. Force and freedom cannot consist
   together. Now that willingness, whereby you think you are willing to
   have Christ for a Saviour, is merely a forced thing. Your heart does
   not go out after Christ of itself, but you are forced and driven to
   seek an interest in him. Christ has no share at all in your heart;
   there is no manner of closing of the heart with him. This forced
   compliance is not what Christ seeks of you; he seeks a free and willing
   acceptance, Psalm 110:3. "Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
   power." He seeks not that you should receive him against your will, but
   with a free will. He seeks entertainment in your heart and choice.- And
   if you refuse thus to receive Christ, how just is it that Christ should
   refuse to receive you? How reasonable are Christ's terms, who offers to
   save all those that willingly, or with a good will, accept of him for
   their Saviour! Who can rationally expect that Christ should force
   himself upon any man to be his Saviour? Or what can be looked for more
   reasonable, than that all who would be saved by Christ, should heartily
   and freely entertain him? And surely it would be very dishonourable for
   Christ to offer himself upon lower terms.- But I would now proceed,

   Secondly, To show that you are not willing to have Christ for a
   Saviour. To convince you of it, consider,

   1. How it is possible that you should be willing to accept of Christ as
   a Saviour from the desert of a punishment that you are not sensible you
   have deserved. If you are truly willing to accept of Christ as a
   Saviour, it must be as a sacrifice to make atonement for your guilt.
   Christ came into the world on this errand, to offer himself as an
   atonement, to answer for our desert of punishment. But how can you be
   willing to have Christ for a Saviour from a desert of hell, if you be
   not sensible that you have a desert of hell? If you have not really
   deserved everlasting burnings in hell, then the very offer of an
   atonement for such a desert is an imposition upon you. If you have no
   such guilt upon you, then the very offer of a satisfaction for that
   guilt is an injury, because it implies in it a charge of guilt that you
   are free from. Now therefore it is impossible that a man who is not
   convinced of his guilt can be willing to accept of such an offer;
   because he cannot be willing to accept the charge which the offer
   implies. A man who is not convinced that he has deserved so dreadful a
   punishment, cannot willingly submit to be charged with it. If he thinks
   he is willing, it is but a mere forced, feigned business; because in
   his heart he looks upon himself greatly injured; and therefore he
   cannot freely accept of Christ, under that notion of a Saviour from the
   desert of such a punishment; for such an acceptance is an implicit
   owning that he does deserve such a punishment.

   I do not say, but that men may be willing to be saved from an
   undeserved punishment; they may rather not suffer it, than suffer it.
   But a man cannot be willing to accept one at God's hands, under the
   notion of a Saviour from a punishment deserved from him which he thinks
   he has not deserved; it is impossible that any one should freely allow
   a Saviour under that notion. Such an one cannot like the way of
   salvation by Christ; for if he thinks he has not deserved hell, then he
   will think that freedom from hell is a debt; and therefore cannot
   willingly and heartily receive it as a free gift.- If a king should
   condemn a man to some tormenting death, which the condemned person
   thought himself not deserving of, but looked upon the sentence as
   unjust and cruel, and the king, when the time of execution drew nigh,
   should offer him his pardon, under the notion of a very great act of
   grace and clemency, the condemned person never could willingly and
   heartily allow it under that notion, because he judged himself unjustly
   condemned.

   Now by this it is evident that you are not willing to accept of Christ
   as your Saviour; because you never yet had such a sense of your own
   sinfulness, and such a conviction of your great guilt in God 's sight,
   as to be indeed convinced that you lay justly condemned to the
   punishment of hell. You never was convinced that you had forfeited all
   favour, and was in God's hands, and at his sovereign and arbitrary
   disposal, to be either destroyed or saved, just as he pleased. You
   never yet was convinced of the sovereignty of God. Hence are there so
   many objections arising against the justice of your punishment from
   original sin, and from God's decree, from mercy shown to others, and
   the like.

   2. That you are not sincerely willing to accept of Christ as your
   Saviour, appears by this, That you never have been convinced that he is
   sufficient for the work of your salvation. You never had a sight or
   sense of any such excellency or worthiness in Christ, as should give
   such great value to his blood and his mediation with God, as that it
   was sufficient to be accepted for such exceeding guilty creatures, who
   have so provoked God, and exposed themselves to such amazing wrath.
   Saying it is so and allowing it be as others say, is a very different
   thing from being really convinced of it, and a being made sensible of
   it in your own heart. The sufficiency of Christ depends upon, or rather
   consists in his excellency. It is because he is so excellent a person
   that his blood is of sufficient value to atone for sin, and it is hence
   that his obedience is so worthy in God's sight; it is also hence that
   his intercession is so prevalent; and therefore those that never had
   any spiritual sight or sense of Christ's excellency, cannot be sensible
   of his sufficiency.

   And that sinners are not convinced that Christ is sufficient for the
   work he has undertaken, appears most manifestly when they are under
   great convictions of their sin, and danger of God's wrath. Though it
   may be before they thought they could allow Christ to be sufficient,
   (for it is easy to allow any one to be sufficient for our defense at a
   time when we see no danger,) yet when they come to be sensible of their
   guilt and God's wrath, what discouraging thoughts do they entertain!
   How are they ready to draw towards despair, as if there were no hope or
   help for such wicked creatures as they! The reason is, They have no
   apprehension or sense of any other way that God's majesty can be
   vindicated, but only in their misery. To tell them of the blood of
   Christ signifies nothing, it does not relieve their sinking, despairing
   hearts. This makes it most evident that they are not convinced that
   Christ is sufficient to be their Mediator.- And as long as they are
   unconvinced of this, it is impossible they should be willing to accept
   of him as their Mediator and Saviour. A man in distressing fear will
   not willingly betake himself to a fort that he judges not sufficient to
   defend him from the enemy. A man will not willingly venture out into
   the ocean in a ship that he suspects is leaky, and will sink before he
   gets through his voyage.

   3. It is evident that you are not willing to have Christ for your
   Saviour, because you have so mean an opinion of him, that you durst not
   trust his faithfulness. One that undertakes to be the Saviour of souls
   had need be faithful; for if he fails in such a trust, how great is the
   loss! But you are not convinced of Christ's faithfulness; as is
   evident, because at such times as when you are in a considerable
   measure sensible of your guilt and God's anger, you cannot be convinced
   that Christ is willing to accept of you, or that he stands ready to
   receive you, if you should come to him, though Christ so much invites
   you to come to him, and has so fully declared that he will not reject
   you, if you do come; as particularly, John 6:37. "Him that cometh to
   me, I will in no wise cast out." Now, there is no man can be heartily
   willing to trust his eternal welfare in the hands of an unfaithful
   person, or one whose faithfulness he suspects.

   4. You are not willing to be saved in that way by Christ, as is
   evident, because you are not willing that your own goodness should be
   set at nought. In the way of salvation by Christ men's own goodness is
   wholly set at nought; there is no account at all made of it. Now you
   cannot be willing to be saved in a way wherein your own goodness is set
   at nought, as is evident, since you make much of it yourself. You make
   much of your prayers and pains in religion, and are often thinking of
   them; how considerable do they appear to you, when you look back upon
   them! And some of you are thinking how much more you have done than
   others, and expecting some respect or regard that God should manifest
   to what you do. Now, if you make so much of what you do yourself, it is
   impossible that you should be freely willing that God should make
   nothing of it . As we may see in other things; if a man is proud of a
   great estate, or if he values himself much upon his honourable office,
   or his great abilities, it is impossible that he should like it, and
   heartily approve of it, that others should make light of these things
   and despise them.

   Seeing therefore it is so evident, that you refuse to accept of Christ
   as your Saviour, why is Christ to be blamed that he does not save you?
   Christ has offered himself to you, to be your Saviour in time past, and
   he continues offering himself still, and you continue to reject him,
   and yet complain that he does not save you.- So strangely unreasonable,
   and inconsistent with themselves, are gospel sinners!

   But I expect there are many of you that still object. Such an objection
   as this, is probably now in the hearts of many here present.

   Objection. If I am not willing to have Christ for my Saviour, I cannot
   make myself willing.- But I would give an answer to this objection by
   laying down two things, that must be acknowledged to be exceeding
   evident.

   1. It is no excuse, that you cannot receive Christ of yourself, unless
   you would if you could. This is so evident of itself, that it scarce
   needs any proof. Certainly if persons would not if they could, it is
   just the same thing as to the blame that lies upon them, whether they
   can or cannot. If you were willing, and then found that you could not,
   your being unable would alter the case, and might be some excuse;
   because then the defect would not be in your will, but only in your
   ability. But as long as you will not, it is no matter, whether you have
   ability or no ability.

   If you are not willing to accept of Christ, it follows that you have no
   sincere willingness to be willing; because the will always necessarily
   approves of and rests in its own acts. To suppose the contrary, would
   be to suppose a contradiction; it would be to suppose that a man's will
   is contrary to itself, or that he wills contrary to what he himself
   wills. As you are not willing to come to Christ, and cannot make
   yourself willing, so you have no sincere desire to be willing; and
   therefore may most justly perish without a Saviour. There is no excuse
   at all for you; for say what you will about your inability, the seat of
   your blame lies in your perverse will, that is an enemy to the Saviour.
   It is in vain for you to tell of your want of power, as long as your
   will is found defective. If a man should hate you, and smite you in the
   face, but should tell you at the same time, that he hated you so much,
   that he could not help choosing and willing so to do, would you take it
   the more patiently for that? Would not your indignation be rather
   stirred up the more?

   2. If you would be willing if you could, that is no excuse, unless your
   unwillingness to be willing be sincere. That which is hypocritical, and
   does not come from the heart, but is merely forced, ought wholly to be
   set aside, as worthy of no consideration; because common sense teaches,
   that what is not hearty, but hypocritical is indeed nothing, being only
   a show of what is not; but that which is good for nothing, ought to go
   for nothing. But if you set aside all that is not free, and call
   nothing a willingness, but a free hearty willingness, then see how the
   case stands, and whether or no you have not lost all your excuse for
   standing out against the calls of the gospel. You say you would make
   yourself willing to accept if you could; but it is not from any good
   principle that you are willing for that. It is not from any free
   inclination, or true respect to Christ, or any love to your duty, or
   any spirit of obedience. It is not from the influence of any real
   respect, or tendency in your heart, towards any thing good, or from any
   other principle than such as is in the hearts of devils, and would make
   them have the same sort of willingness in the same circumstances. It is
   therefore evident, that there can be no goodness in that would be
   willing to come to Christ: and that which has no goodness, cannot be an
   excuse for any badness. If there be no good in it, then it signifies
   nothing, and weighs nothing, when put into the scales to counterbalance
   that which is bad.

   Sinners therefore spend their time in foolish arguing and objecting,
   making much of that which is good for nothing, making those excuses
   that are not worth offering. It is in vain to keep making objection.
   You stand justly condemned. The blame lies at your door: Thrust it off
   from you as often as you will, it will return upon you. Sew fig-leaves
   as long as you will, your nakedness will appear. You continue wilfully
   and wickedly rejecting Jesus Christ, and will not have him for your
   Saviour, and therefore it is sottish madness in you to charge Christ
   with injustice that he does not save you.

   Here is the sin of unbelief! Thus the guilt of that great sin lies upon
   you! If you never had thus treated a Saviour, you might most justly
   have been damned to all eternity: it would but be exactly agreeable to
   your treatment of God. But besides this, when God, notwithstanding, has
   offered you his own dear Son, to save you from this endless misery you
   had deserved, and not only so, but to make you happy eternally in the
   enjoyment of himself, you have refused him, and would not have him for
   your Saviour, and still refuse to comply with the offers of the gospel;
   what can render any person more inexcusable? If you should now perish
   for ever, what can you have to say?

   Hereby the justice of God in your destruction appears in two respects:

   1. It is more abundantly manifest that it is just that you should be
   destroyed. Justice never appears so conspicuous as it does after
   refused and abused mercy. Justice in damnation appears abundantly the
   more clear and bright, after a wilful rejection of offered salvation.
   What can an offended prince do more than freely offer pardon to a
   condemned malefactor? And if he refuses to accept of it, will any one
   say that his execution is unjust?

   2. God's justice will appear in your greater destruction. Besides the
   guilt that you would have had if a Saviour never had been offered, you
   bring that great additional guilt upon you, of most ungratefully
   refusing offered deliverance. What more base and vile treatment of God
   can there be, than for you, when justly condemned to eternal misery,
   and ready to be executed, and God graciously sends his own Son, who
   comes and knocks at your door with a pardon in his hand, and not only a
   pardon, but a deed of eternal glory; I say, what can be worse, than for
   you, out of dislike and enmity against God and his Son, to refuse to
   accept those benefits at his hands? How justly may the anger of God be
   greatly incensed and increased by it! When a sinner thus ungratefully
   rejects mercy, his last error is worse than the first; this is more
   heinous than all his former rebellion, and may justly bring down more
   fearful wrath upon him.

   The heinousness of this sin of rejecting a Saviour especially appears
   in two things:

   1. The greatness of the benefits offered: which appears in the
   greatness of the deliverance, which is from inexpressible degrees of
   corruption and wickedness of heart and life, the least degree of which
   is infinitely evil; and from misery that is everlasting; and in the
   greatness and glory of the inheritance purchased and offered. Hebrews
   2:3. "How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation."

   2. The wonderfulness of the way in which these benefits are procured
   and offered. That God should lay help on his own Son, when our case was
   so deplorable that help could be had in no mere creature; and that he
   should undertake for us, and should come into the world, and take upon
   him our nature, and should not only appear in a low state of life, but
   should die such a death, and endure such torments and contempt for
   sinners while enemies, how wonderful is it! And what tongue or pen can
   set forth the greatness of the ingratitude, baseness, and perverseness
   there is in it, when a perishing sinner that is in the most extreme
   necessity of salvation, rejects it, after it is procured in such a way
   as this! That so glorious a person should be thus treated, and that
   when he comes on so gracious an errand! That he should stand so long
   offering himself and calling and inviting, as he has done to many of
   you, and all to no purpose, but all the while be set at nought! Surely
   you might justly be cast into hell without one more offer of a Saviour!
   Yea, and thrust down into the lowest hell! Herein you have exceeded the
   very devils; for they never rejected the offers of such glorious mercy;
   no, nor of any mercy at all. This will be the distinguishing
   condemnation of gospel-sinners, John 3:18. "He that believeth not is
   condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only
   begotten Son of God."- That outward smoothness of your carriage towards
   Christ, that appearance of respect to him in your looks, your speeches,
   and gestures, do not argue but that you set him at nought in your
   heart. There may be much of these outward shows of respect, and yet you
   be like Judas, that betrayed the Son of man with a kiss; and like those
   mockers that bowed the knee before him, and at the same time spit in
   his face.

   III. If God should for ever cast you off and destroy you, it would be
   agreeable to your treatment of others.- It would be no other than what
   would be exactly answerable to your behaviour towards your
   fellow-creatures, that have the same human nature, and are naturally in
   the same circumstances with you, and that you ought to love as
   yourself. And that appears especially in two things.

   1. You have many of you been opposite in your spirit to the salvation
   of others. There are several ways that natural men manifest a spirit of
   opposition against the salvation of souls. It sometimes appears by a
   fear that their companions, acquaintances, and equals, will obtain
   mercy, and so become unspeakably happier than they. It is sometimes
   manifested by an uneasiness at the news of what others have hopefully
   obtained. It appears when persons envy others for it, and dislike them
   the more, and disrelish their talk, and avoid their company, and cannot
   bear to hear their religious discourse, and especially to receive
   warnings and counsels from them. And it oftentimes appears by their
   backwardness to entertain charitable thoughts of them, and by their
   being brought with difficulty to believe that they have obtained mercy,
   and a forwardness to listen to any thing that seems to contradict it.
   The devil hated to own Job's sincerity, Job 1:7, &c. and chapter 2,
   verses 3, 4, 5. There appears very often much of this spirit of the
   devil in natural men. Sometimes they are ready to make a ridicule of
   others' pretended godliness; they speak of the ground of others' hopes,
   as the enemies of the Jews did of the wall that they built. Nehemiah
   4:3. "Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he said, That which they
   build, if a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall."
   There are many that join with Sanballat and Tobiah, and are of the same
   spirit with them. There always was, and always will be, an enmity
   betwixt the seed of the serpent and the seed of the women. It appeared
   in Cain, who hated his brother, because he was more acceptable to God
   than himself; and it appears still in these times, and in this place.
   There are many that are like the elder brother, who could not bear that
   the prodigal when he returned should be received with such joy and good
   entertainment, and was put into a fret by it, both against his brother
   that had returned, and his father that had made him so welcome. Luke
   15.

   Thus have many of you been opposite to the salvation of others, who
   stand in as great necessity of it as you. You have been against their
   being delivered from everlasting misery, who can bear it no better than
   you; not because their salvation would do you any hurt, or their
   damnation help you, any otherwise than as it would gratify that vile
   spirit that is so much like the spirit of the devil, who, because he is
   miserable himself, is unwilling that others should be happy. How just
   therefore is it that God should be opposite to your salvation! If you
   have so little love or mercy in you as to begrudge your neighbour's
   salvation, whom you have no cause to hate, but the law of God and
   nature requires you to love, why is God bound to exercise such infinite
   love and mercy to you, as to save you at the price of his own blood?
   you, whom he is no way bound to love, but who have deserved his hatred
   a thousand and a thousand times? You are not willing that others should
   be converted, who have behaved themselves injuriously towards you; and
   yet, will you count it hard if God does not bestow converting grace
   upon you that have deserved ten thousand times as ill of God, as ever
   any of your neighbours have of you? You are opposite to God's showing
   mercy to those that you think have been vicious persons, and are very
   unworthy of such mercy. Is others' unworthiness a just reason why God
   should not bestow mercy on them? And yet will God be hard, if,
   notwithstanding all your unworthiness, and the abominableness of your
   spirit and practice in his sight, he does not show you mercy? You would
   have God bestow liberally on you, and upbraid not; but yet when he
   shows mercy to others, you are ready to upbraid as soon as you hear of
   it; you immediately are thinking with yourself how ill they have
   behaved themselves; and it may be your mouths on this occasion are
   open, enumerating and aggravating the sins they have been guilty of.
   You would have God bury all your faults, and wholly blot out all your
   transgressions; but yet if he bestows mercy on others, it may be you
   will take that occasion to rake up all their old faults that you can
   think of. You do not much reflect on and condemn yourself for your
   baseness and unjust spirit towards others, in your opposition to their
   salvation; you do not quarrel with yourself, and condemn yourself for
   this; but yet you in your heart will quarrel with God, and fret at his
   dispensations, because you think he seems opposite to showing mercy to
   you. One would think that the consideration of these things should for
   ever stop your mouth.

   2. Consider how you have promoted others' damnation. Many of you, by
   the bad examples you have set, by corrupting the minds of others, by
   your sinful conversation, by leading them into or strengthening them in
   sin, and by the mischief you have done in human society other ways that
   might be mentioned, have been guilty of those things that have tended
   to others' damnation. You have heretofore appeared on the side of sin
   and Satan, and have strengthened their interest, and have been many
   ways accessary to others' sins, have hardened their hearts, and thereby
   have done what has tended to the ruin of their souls.- Without doubt
   there are those here present who have been in a great measure the means
   of others' damnation. One man may really be a means of others'
   damnation as well as salvation. Christ charges the scribes and
   Pharisees with this, Matthew 23:13. "Ye shut up the kingdom of heaven
   against men; for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them
   that are entering, to go in." We have no reason to think that this
   congregation has none in it who are cursed from day to day by poor
   souls that are roaring out in hell, whose damnation they have been the
   means of, or have greatly contributed to.- There are many who
   contribute to their own children's damnation, by neglecting their
   education, by setting them bad examples, and bringing them up in sinful
   ways. They take some care of their bodies, but take little care of
   their poor souls; they provide for them bread to eat, but deny them the
   bread of life, that their famishing souls stand in need of. And are
   there no such parents here who have thus treated their children? If
   their children be not gone to hell, no thanks to them; it is not
   because they have not done what has tended to their destruction. Seeing
   therefore you have had no more regard to others' salvation, and have
   promoted their damnation, how justly might God leave you to perish
   yourself!

   IV. If God should eternally cast you off, it would but be agreeable to
   your own behaviour towards yourself; and that in two respects:

   1. In being so careless of your own salvation. You have refused to take
   care for your salvation, as God has counselled and commanded you from
   time to time; and why may not God neglect it, now you seek it of him?
   Is God obliged to be more careful of your happiness, than you are
   either of your own happiness or his glory? Is God bound to take that
   care for you, out of love to you, that you will not take for yourself,
   either from love to yourself, or regard to his authority? How long, and
   how greatly, have you neglected the welfare of your precious soul,
   refusing to take pains and deny yourself, or put yourself a little out
   of your way for your salvation, while God has been calling upon you!
   Neither your duty to God, nor love to your own soul, were enough to
   induce you to do little things for your own eternal welfare; and yet do
   you now expect that God should do great things, putting forth almighty
   power, and exercising infinite mercy for it? You was urged to take care
   for your salvation, and not to put it off. You was told that was the
   best time before you grew older, and that it might be, if you would put
   it off, God would not hear you afterwards; but yet you would not
   hearken; you would run the venture of it. Now how justly might God
   order it so, that it should be too late, leaving you to seek in vain!
   You was told, that you would repent of it if you delayed; but you would
   not hear: how justly therefore may God give you cause to repent of it,
   by refusing to show you mercy now! If God sees you going on in ways
   contrary to his commands and his glory, and requires you to forsake
   them, and tells you that they tend to the destruction of your own soul,
   and therefore counsels you to avoid them, and you refuse; how just
   would it be if God should be provoked by it, henceforward to be as
   careless of the good of your soul as you are yourself!

   2. You have not only neglected your salvation, but you have wilfully
   taken direct courses to undo yourself. You have gone on in those ways
   and practices which have directly tended to your damnation, and have
   been perverse and obstinate it. You cannot plead ignorance; you had all
   the light set before you that you could desire. God told you that you
   was undoing yourself; but yet you would do it. He told you that the
   path you was going in led to destruction, and counselled you to avoid
   it; but you would not hearken. How justly therefore may God leave you
   to be undone! You have obstinately persisted to travel in the way that
   leads to hell for a long time, contrary to God's continual counsels and
   commands, till it may be at length you are got almost to your journey's
   end, and are come near to hell's gate, and so begin to be sensible of
   your danger and misery; and not account it unjust and hard if God will
   not deliver you! You have destroyed yourself, and destroyed yourself
   wilfully, contrary to God's repeated counsels, yea, and destroyed
   yourself in fighting against God. Now therefore, why do you blame any
   but yourself if you are destroyed? If you will undo yourself in
   opposing God, and while God opposes you by his calls and counsels, and,
   it may be too, by the convictions of his Spirit, what can you object
   against it, if God now leaves you to be undone? You would have your own
   way, and did not like that God should oppose you in it, and your way
   was to ruin your own soul; how just therefore is it, if, now at length,
   God ceases to oppose you, and falls in with you, and lets your soul be
   ruined; and as you would destroy yourself, so should put to his hand to
   destroy you too! The ways you went on in had a natural tendency to your
   misery: if you would drink poison in opposition to God, and in contempt
   of him and his advice, who can you blame but yourself if you are
   poisoned, and so perish? If you would run into the fire against all
   restraints both of God's mercy and authority, you must even blame
   yourself if you are burnt.

   Thus I have proposed some things to your consideration, which, if you
   are not exceeding blind, senseless, and perverse, will stop your mouth,
   and convince you that you stand justly condemned before God; and that
   he would in no wise deal hardly with you, but altogether justly, in
   denying you any mercy, and in refusing to hear your prayers, though you
   pray never so earnestly, and never so often, and continue in it never
   so long. God may utterly disregard your tears and moans, your heavy
   heart, your earnest desires, and great endeavours; and he may cast you
   into eternal destruction, without any regard to your welfare, denying
   you converting grace, and giving you over to Satan, and at last cast
   you into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, to be there to
   eternity, having no rest day or night, for ever glorifying his justice
   upon you in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the
   Lamb.

   Objection. But here many may still object, (for I am sensible it is a
   hard thing to stop sinners' mouths,) "God shows mercy to others that
   have done these things as well as I, yea, that have done a great deal
   worse than I."

   Answer. 1. That does not prove that God is any way bound to show mercy
   to you, or them either. If God bestows it on others, he does not so
   because he is bound to bestow it: he might if he had pleased, with
   glorious justice, have denied it them. If God bestows it on some, that
   does not prove that he is bound to bestow it on any; and if he is bound
   to bestow it on none, then he is not bound to bestow it on you. God is
   in debt to none; and if he gives to some that he is not in debt to,
   because it is his pleasure, that does not bring him into debt to
   others. It alters not the case as to you, whether others have it, or
   have it not: you do not deserve damnation the less, than if mercy never
   had been bestowed on any at all. Matthew 20:15. "Is thine eye evil,
   because mine is good?"

   2. If this objection be good, then the exercise of God's mercy is not
   in his own right, and his grace is not his own to give. That which God
   may not dispose of as he pleases, is not his own; for that which is
   one's own, is at his own disposal: but if it be not God's own, then he
   is not capable of making a gift or present of it to any one; it is
   impossible to give what is a debt.- What is it that you would make of
   God? Must the great God be tied up, that he must not use his own
   pleasure in bestowing his own gifts, but if he bestows them on one,
   must be looked upon obliged to bestow them on another? Is not God
   worthy to have the same right, with respect to the gifts of his grace,
   that a man has to his money or goods? Is it because God is not so
   great, and should be more in subjection than man, that this cannot be
   allowed him? If any of you see cause to show kindness to a neighbour,
   do all the rest of your neighbours come to you, and tell you, that you
   owe them so much as you have given to such a man? But this is the way
   that you deal with God, as though God were not worthy to have as
   absolute a property in his goods, as you have in yours.

   At this rate God cannot make a present of any thing; he has nothing of
   his own to bestow: if he has a mind to show peculiar favour to some, or
   to lay some particular persons under peculiar obligations to him, he
   cannot do it; because he has no special gift at his own disposal. If
   this be the case, why do you pray to God to bestow saving grace upon
   you? If God does not do fairly to deny it you, because he bestows it on
   others, then it is not worth your while to pray for it, but you may go
   and tell him that he has bestowed it on others as bad or worse than
   you, and so demand it of him as a debt. And at this rate persons never
   need to thank God for salvation, when it is bestowed; for what occasion
   is there to thank God for that which was not at his own disposal, and
   that he could not fairly have denied? The thing at bottom is, that men
   have low thoughts of God, and high thoughts of themselves; and
   therefore it is that they look upon God as having so little right, and
   they so much. Matthew 20:15. "Is it not lawful for me to do what I will
   with mine own?"

   3. God may justly show greater respect to others than to you, for you
   have shown greater respect to others than to God. You have rather
   chosen to offend God than men. God only shows a greater respect to
   others, who are by nature your equals, than to you; but you have shown
   a greater respect to those that are infinitely inferior to God than to
   him. You have shown a greater regard to wicked men than to God; you
   have honoured them more, loved them better, and adhered to them rather
   than to him. Yea, you have honoured the devil, in many respects, more
   than God: you have chosen his will and his interest, rather than God's
   will and his glory: you have chosen a little worldly pelf, rather than
   God: you have set more by a vile lust than by him: you have chosen
   these things, and rejected God. You have set your heart on these
   things, and cast God behind your back: and where is the injustice if
   God is pleased to show greater respect to others than to you, or if he
   chooses others and rejects you? You have shown greater respect to vile
   and worthless things, and no respect to God's glory; and why may not
   God set his love on others, and have no respect to your happiness? You
   have shown great respect to others, and not to God, whom you are laid
   under infinite obligations to respect above all; and why may not God
   show respect to others, and not to you, who never have laid him under
   the least obligation?

   And will you not be ashamed, notwithstanding all these things, still to
   open your mouth, to object and cavil about the decrees of God, and
   other things that you cannot fully understand. Let the decrees of God
   be what they will, that alters not the case as to your liberty, any
   more than if God had only foreknown. And why is God to blame for
   decreeing things? Especially since he decrees nothing but good. How
   unbecoming an infinitely wise Being would it have been to have made a
   world, and let things run at random, without disposing events, or
   fore-ordering how they should come to pass? And what is that to you,
   how God has fore-ordered things, as long as your constant experience
   teaches you, that it does not hinder your doing what you choose to do.
   This you know, and your daily practice and behaviour amongst men
   declares that you are fully sensible of it with respect to yourself and
   others. Still to object, because there are some things in God's
   dispensations above your understanding, is exceedingly unreasonable.
   Your own conscience charges you with great guilt, and with those things
   that have been mentioned, let the secret things of God be what they
   will. Your conscience charges you with those vile dispositions, and
   that base behaviour towards God, that you would at any time most highly
   resent in your neighbour towards you, and that not a whit the less for
   any concern those secret counsels and mysterious dispensations of God
   may have in the matter. It is in vain for you to exalt yourself against
   an infinitely great, and holy, and just God. If you continue in it, it
   will be to your eternal shame and confusion, when hereafter you shall
   see at whose door all the blame of your misery lies.

   I will finish what I have to say to natural men in the application of
   this doctrine, with a caution not to improve the doctrine to
   discouragement. For though it would be righteous in God for ever to
   cast you off, and destroy you, yet it would also be just in God to save
   you, in and through Christ, who has made complete satisfaction for all
   sin. Romans 3:25, 26. "Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation,
   through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
   remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; to
   declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just,
   and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus." Yea, God may,
   through this Mediator, not only justly, but honourably, show you mercy.
   The blood of Christ is so precious, that it is fully sufficient to pay
   the debt you have contracted, and perfectly to vindicate the Divine
   Majesty from all the dishonour cast upon it, by these many great sins
   of yours that have been mentioned. It was as great, and indeed a much
   greater thing, for Christ to die, than it would have been for you and
   all mankind to have burnt in hell to all eternity. Of such dignity and
   excellency is Christ in the eyes of God, that, seeing he has suffered
   so much for poor sinners, God is willing to be at peace with them,
   however vile and unworthy they have been, and on how many accounts
   soever the punishment would be just. So that you need not be at all
   discouraged from seeking mercy, for there is enough in Christ.

   Indeed it would not become the glory of God's majesty to show mercy to
   you, so sinful and vile a creature, for any thing that you have done;
   for such worthless and despicable things as your prayers, and other
   religious performances. It would be very dishonourable and unworthy of
   God so to do, and it is in vain to expect it. He will show mercy only
   on Christ's account; and that, according to his sovereign pleasure, on
   whom he pleases, when he pleases, and in what manner he pleases. You
   cannot bring him under obligation by your works; do what you will, he
   will not look on himself obliged. But if it be his pleasure, he can
   honourably show mercy through Christ to any sinner of you all, not one
   in this congregation excepted.- Therefore here is encouragement for you
   still to seek and wait, notwithstanding all your wickedness; agreeable
   to Samuel's speech to the children of Israel, when they were terrified
   with the thunder and rain that God sent, and when guilt stared them in
   the face, 1 Samuel 12:20. "Fear not; ye have done all this wickedness;
   yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all
   your heart."

   I would conclude this discourse by putting the godly in mind of the
   freeness and wonderfulness of the grace of God towards them. For such
   were the same of you.- The case was just so with you as you have heard;
   you had such a wicked heart, you lived such a wicked life, and it would
   have been most just with God for ever to have cast you off: but he has
   had mercy upon you; he hath made his glorious grace appear in your
   everlasting salvation. You had no love to God; but yet he has exercised
   unspeakable love to you. You have contemned God, and set light by him:
   but so great a value has God's grace set on you and your happiness,
   that you have been redeemed at the price of the blood of his own Son.
   You chose to be with Satan in his service; but yet God hath made you a
   joint heir with Christ of his glory. You was ungrateful for past
   mercies; yet God not only continued those mercies, but bestowed
   unspeakably greater mercies upon you. You refused to hear when God
   called; yet God heard you when you called. You abused the infiniteness
   of God's mercy to encourage yourself in sin against him; yet God has
   manifested the infiniteness of that mercy, in the exercises of it
   towards you. You have rejected Christ, and set him at nought; and yet
   he is become your Saviour. You have neglected your own salvation; but
   God has not neglected it. You have destroyed yourself; but yet in God
   has been your help. God has magnified his free grace towards you, and
   not to others; because he has chosen you, and it hath pleased him to
   set his love upon you.

   O! what cause is here for praise! What obligations you are under to
   bless the Lord who hath dealt bountifully with you, and magnify his
   holy name! What cause for you to praise God in humility, to walk humbly
   before him. Ezekiel 16:63. "That thou mayest remember and be
   confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame,
   when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou hast done, saith the
   Lord God!" You shall never open your mouth in boasting, or
   self-justification; but lie the lower before God for his mercy to you.
   You have reason, the more abundantly, to open your mouth in God's
   praises, that they may be continually in your mouth, both here and to
   all eternity, for his rich, unspeakable, and sovereign mercy to you,
   whereby he, and he alone, hath made you to differ from others.
     __________________________________________________________________

CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE

    Hebrews 5:12 -- For Then for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need
    that one teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles of
    God; and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.
     __________________________________________________________________

   These words are a complaint, which the apostle makes against the
   Christian Hebrews, for their want of such proficiency in the knowledge
   of the doctrines and mysteries of religion, as might have been expected
   of them. The apostle complains, that they had not made that progress in
   their acquaintance with the things taught in the oracles of God, which
   they ought to have made. And he means to reprove them, not merely for
   their deficiency in spiritual and experimental knowledge of divine
   things, but for their deficiency in a doctnnal acquaintance with the
   principles of religion, and the truths of Christ Ian divinity; as is
   evident by the manner in which the apostle introduces this reproof. The
   occasion of his introducing it is this: In the next text but one
   preceding. he mentions Christ as being " Called of God an high priest
   after the order of Melchizedek." In the Old Testament, the oracles of
   God, Melchizedek was held forth as an eminent type of Christ; and the
   account we there have of him contains many gospel mysteries. These
   mysteries the apostle was willing to point out to the Christian
   Hebrews; but he apprehended, that through their weakness in knowledge,
   they would not understand him; and therefore breaks off for the present
   from saying any thing about Melchizedek, thus (ver. 11.) "Of whom we
   have many things to say, and hard to be uttered; seeing ye are all dull
   of hearing;" i.e. there are many things concerning Melchizedek which
   contain wonderful gospel-mysteries, and which I would take notice of to
   you, were it not that I am afraid, that through your dulness,and
   backwardness in understanding these things, you would only be puzzled
   and confounded by my discourse, and so receive no benefit; and that it
   would be too hard for you, as meat that is too strong.

   Then come in the words of the text: " For when for the time ye ought to
   be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which be the first
   principles of the oracles of God; and are become such as have need of
   milk, and not of strong meat." As much as to say, Indeed it might have
   been expected of you, that you should have known enough of the Holy
   Scriptures, to be able to understand and digest such mysteries: but it
   is not so with you. The apostle speaks of their proficiency in such
   knowledge as is conveyed by human teaching: as appears by that
   expression, " When for the time ye ought to be teachers;" which
   includes not only a practical and experimental, but also a doctrinal,
   knowledge of the truths and mysteries of religion.

   Again, the apostle speaks of such knowledge, whereby Christians are
   enabled to understand those things in divinity which are more abstruse
   and difficult to be understood, and which require great skill in things
   of this nature. This is more fully expressed in the two next verses: "
   For every one that useth milk is unskilful in the word of
   righteousness; for he is a babe. But strong meat belongeth to them that
   are of full age, even those who, by reason of use, have their senses
   exercised to discern both good and evil." It is such knowledge, that
   proficiency in it shall carry persons beyond the first principles of
   religion. As here; " Ye have need that one teach you again which be the
   first principles of the oracles of God." Therefore the apostle, in the
   beginning of the next chapter, advises them " to leave the first
   principles of the doctrine of Christ, and to go on unto perfection."

   We may observe that the fault of this defect appears, in that they had
   not made proficiency according to their time.-For the time, they ought
   to have been teachers. As they were Christians, their business was to
   learn and gain Christian knowledge. They were scholars in the school of
   Christ; and if they had improved their time in learning, as they ought
   to have done, they might, by the time when the apostle wrote, have been
   fit to be teachers in this school. To whatever business any one is
   devoted, it may be expected that his perfection in it shall be
   answerable to the time he has had to learn and perfect
   himself.-Christians should not always remain babes, but should grow in
   Christian knowledge; and leaving the food of babes, they should learn
   to digest strong meat.

  DOCTRINE

   Every Christian should make a business of endeavoring to grow in
   knowledge in divinity.-This is indeed esteemed the business of divines
   and ministers: it is commonly thought to be their work, by the study of
   the Scriptures, and other instructive books, to gain knowledge; and
   most seem to think that it may be left to them, as what belongeth not
   to others. But if the apostle had entertained this notion, he would
   never have blamed the Christian Hebrews for not having acquired
   knowledge enough to be teachers. Or if he had thought, that this
   concerned Christians in general only as a thing by the by, and that
   their time should not in a considerable measure be taken up with this
   business; he never would have so much blamed them, that their
   proficiency in knowledge had not been answerable to the time which they
   had had to learn.

   In handling this subject, I shall show-what is intended by
   divinity-what kind of knowledge in divinity is intended-why knowledge
   in divinity is necessary. And why all Christians should make a business
   of endeavouring to grow in this knowledge.

   SECT. I
   What is intended by divinity, as the object of Christian knowledge

   VARIOUS definitions have been given of this subject by those who have
   treated on it. I shall not now stand to inquire which, according to the
   rules of art, is the most accurate definition; but shall so define or
   describe it, as I think has the greatest tendency to convey a proper
   notion of it.-It is that science or doctrine which comprehends all
   those truths and rules which concern the great business of religion.

   There are various kinds of arts and sciences taught and learned in the
   schools, which are conversant about various objects; about the works of
   nature in general, as philosophy; or the visible heavens, as astronomy;
   or the sea, as navigation; or the earth, as geography; or the body of
   man, as physic and anatomy; or the soul of man. with regard to its
   natural powers and qualities, as logic and pneumatology; or about human
   government, as politics and jurisprudence. But one science, or kind of
   knowledge and doctrine, is above all the rest; as it treats concerning
   God and the great business of religion. Divinity is not learned, as
   other sciences, merely by the improvement of man's natural reason, but
   is taught by God himself in a book full of instruction, which he hath
   given us for that end. This is the rule which God hath given to the
   world to be their guide in searching after this kind of knowledge, and
   is a summary of all things of this nature needful for us to know. Upon
   this account divinity is rather called a doctrine, than an art or
   science.

   Indeed there is what is called natural religion. There are many truths
   concerning God, and our duty to him, which are evident by the light of
   nature. But Christian divinity, properly so called, is not evident by
   the light of nature; it depends on revelation. Such are our
   circumstances now in our fallen state that nothing which it is needful
   for us to know concerning God is manifest by the light of nature, in
   the manner in which it is necessary for us to know it. For the
   knowledge of no truth in divinity is of significance to us, any
   otherwise than as it some way or other belongs to the gospel-scheme, or
   as it relates to a Mediator. But the light of nature teaches us no
   truth in this matter. Therefore it cannot be said, that we come to the
   knowledge of any part of Christian truth by the light of nature. It is
   only the word of God, contained in the Old and New Testament, which
   teaches us Christian divinity.

   This comprehends all that is taught in the Scriptures, and so all that
   we need know, or is to be known, concerning God and Jesus Christ,
   concerning our duty to God, and our happiness in God. Divinity is
   commonly defined, the doctrine of living to God; and by some who seem
   to be more accurate, the doctrine of living to God by Christ. It
   comprehends all Christian doctrines as they are in Jesus, and all
   Christian rules directing us in living to God by Christ. There is no
   one doctrine, no promise, no rule, but what some way or other relates
   to the Christian and divine life, or our living to God by Christ. They
   all relate to this, in two respects, viz. as they tend to promote our
   living to God here in this world, in a life of faith and holiness, and
   also as they tend to bring us to a life of perfect holiness and
   happiness, in the full enjoyment of God hereafter.

   SECT. II
   What kind of knowledge in divinity, is intended in the doctrine

   THERE are two kinds of knowledge of divine truth, viz. speculative and
   practical, or in other terms, natural and spiritual. The former remains
   only in the head. No other faculty but the understanding is concerned
   in it. It consists in having a natural or rational knowledge of the
   things of religion, or such a knowledge as is to be obtained by the
   natural exercise of our own faculties, without any special illumination
   of the Spirit of God. The latter rests not entirely in the head, or in
   the speculative ideas of things; but the heart is concerned in it: it
   principally consists in the sense of the heart. The mere intellect,
   without the will or the inclination, is not the seat of it. And it may
   not only be called seeing, but feeling or tasting. Thus there is a
   difference between having a right speculative notion of the doctrines
   contained in the word of God, and having a due sense of them in the
   heart. In the former consists the speculative or natural knowledge, in
   the latter consists the spiritual or practical knowledge of them.

   Neither of these is intended in the doctrine exclusively of the other:
   but it is intended that we should seek the former in order to the
   latter. The latter, or the spiritual and practical, is of the greatest
   importance; for a speculative without a spiritual knowledge, is to no
   purpose, but to make our condemnation the greater. Yet a speculative
   knowledge is also of infinite importance in this respect, that without
   it we can have no spiritual or practical knowledge.

   I have already shown, that the apostle speaks not only of a spiritual
   knowledge, but of such as can be acquired, and communicated from one to
   another. Yet it is not to be thought, that he means this exclusively of
   the other. But he would have the Christian Hebrews seek the one, in
   order to the other. Therefore

   the former is first and most directly intended; it is intended that
   Christians should, by reading and other proper means, seek a good
   rational knowledge of the things of divinity: while the latter is more
   indirectly intended, since it is to be sought by the other. But I
   proceed to

   SECT. III
   The usefulness and necessity of the knowledge of divine truths

   THERE is no other way by which any means of grace whatsoever can be of
   any benefit, but by knowledge. All teaching is in vain, without
   learning. Therefore the preaching of the gospel would be wholly to no
   purpose, if it conveyed no knowledge to the mind. There is an order of
   men which Christ has appointed on purpose to be teachers in his church.
   But they teach in vain, if no knowledge in these things is gained by
   their teaching. It is impossible that their teaching and preaching
   should be a mean of grace, or of any good in the hearts of their
   hearers, any otherwise than by knowledge imparted to the understanding.
   Otherwise it would be of as much benefit to the auditory, if the
   minister should preach in some unknown tongue. All the difference is,
   that preaching in a known tongue conveys something to the
   understanding, which preaching in an unknown tongue cloth not. On this
   account, such preaching must be unprofitable. In such things men
   receive nothing, when they understand nothing; and are not at all
   edified, unless some knowledge be conveyed; agreeable to the apostle's
   arguing, I Cor. xiv. 2,6.

   No speech can be a mean of grace, but by conveying knowledge. Otherwise
   the speech is as much lost as if there had been no man there, and if he
   that spoke, had spoken only into the air; as it follows in the passage
   just quoted, ver. 6,10. God deals with man as with a rational creature;
   and when faith is in exercise, it is not about something he knows not
   what. Therefore hearing is absolutely necessary to faith; because
   hearing is necessary to understanding, Rom. x. 14. " How shall they
   believe in him of whom they have not heard?" In like manner, there can
   be no love without knowledge. It is not according to the nature of the
   human soul, to love an object which is entirely unknown.

   The heart cannot be set upon an object of which there is no idea in the
   understanding. The reasons which induce the soul to love, must first be
   understood, before they can have a reasonable influence on the heart.

   God hath given us the Bible, which is a book of instructions. But this
   book can be of no manner of profit to us, any otherwise than as it
   conveys some knowledge to the mind: it can profit us no more than if it
   were written in the Chinese or Tartarian language, of which we know not
   one word. So the sacraments of the gospel can have a proper effect no
   other way, than by conveying some knowledge. They represent certain
   things by visible signs. And what is the end of signs, but to convey
   some knowledge of the things signified? Such is the nature of man, that
   no object can come at the heart but through the door of the
   understanding: and there can be no spiritual knowledge of that of which
   there is not first a rational knowledge. It is impossible that any one
   should see the truth or excellency of any doctrine of the gospel, who
   knows not what that doctrine is. A man cannot see the wonderful
   excellency and love of Christ in doing such and such things for
   sinners, unless his understanding be first informed how those things
   were done. He cannot have a taste of the sweetness and excellency of
   divine truth, unless he first have a notion that there is such a thing.

   Without knowledge in divinity, none would differ from the most ignorant
   and barbarous heathens. The heathens remain in gross darkness, because
   they are not instructed, and have not obtained the knowledge of divine
   truths.

   If men have no knowledge of these things, the faculty of reason in them
   will be wholly in vain. The faculty of reason and understanding was
   given for actual understanding and knowledge. If a man have no actual
   knowledge, the faculty or capacity of knowing is of no use to him. And
   if he have actual knowledge, yet if he be destitute of the knowledge of
   those things which are the last end of his being, and for the sake of
   the knowledge of which he had more understanding given him than the
   beasts; then still his faculty of reason is in vain; he might as well
   have been a beast as a man. But divine subjects are the things, to know
   which we had the faculty of reason given us. They are the things which
   appertain to the end of our being, and to the great business for which
   we are made. Therefore a man cannot have

   his faculty of understanding to any good purpose, further than he hath
   knowledge of divine truth.

   So that this kind of knowledge is absolutely necessary.-Other kinds of
   knowledge may be very useful. Some other sciences, such as astronomy,
   natural philosophy, and geography, may be very excellent in their kind.
   But the knowledge of this divine science is infinitely more useful and
   important than that of all other sciences whatever.

   SECT. IV
   Why all Christians should make a business of endeavouring to grow in
   the knowledge of divinity

   CHRISTIANS ought not to content themselves with such degrees of
   knowledge of divinity as they have already obtained. It should not
   satisfy them, as they know as much as is absolutely necessary to
   salvation, but should seek to make progress.

   This endeavour to make progress in such knowledge ought not to be
   attended to as a thing by the bye, but all Christians should make a
   business of it. They should look upon it as a part of their daily
   business, and no small part of it neither. It should be attended to as
   a considerable part of the work of their high calling.-For

   1. Our business should doubtless much consist in employing those
   faculties, by which we are distinguished from the beasts, about those
   things which are the main end of those faculties. The reason why we
   have faculties superior to those of the brutes given us, is, that we
   are indeed designed for a superior employment. That which the Creator
   intended should be our main employment, is something above what he
   intended the beast for, and therefore hath given us superior powers.
   Therefore, without doubt, it should be a considerable part of our
   business to improve those superior faculties. But the faculty by which
   we are chiefly distinguished from the brutes, is the faculty of
   understanding. It follows then, that we should make it our chief
   business to improve this faculty, and should by no means prosecute it
   as a business by the bye. For us to make the improvement of this
   faculty a business by the bye, is in effect for us to make the faculty
   of understanding itself a by,faculty, if I may so speak, a faculty of
   less importance than others: whereas indeed it is the highest faculty
   we have.

   But we cannot make a business of the improvement of our intellectual
   faculty, any otherwise than by making a business of improving ourselves
   in actual knowledge. So that those who make not this very much their
   business; but instead of improving their understanding to acquire
   knowledge, are chiefly devoted to their inferior power-to please their
   senses, and gratify their animal appetites-not only behave themselves
   in a manner not becoming Christians, but also act as if they had
   forgotten that they are men, and that God hath set them above the
   brutes, by giving them understanding.

   God hath given to man some things in common with the brutes, as his
   outward senses, his bodily appetites, a capacity of bodily pleasure and
   pain, and other animal faculties: and some things he hath given him
   superior to the brutes, the chief of which is a faculty of
   understanding and reason. Now God never gave man these faculties to be
   subject to those which he hath in common with the brutes. This would be
   great confusion, and equivalent to making man to be a servant of the
   beasts. On the contrary, he has given those inferior powers to be
   employed in subserviency to man's understanding; and therefore it must
   be a great part of man's principal business to improve his
   understanding by acquiring knowledge. If so, then it will follow, that
   it should be a main part of his business to improve his understanding
   in acquiring divine knowledge, or the knowledge of the things of
   divinity: for the knowledge of these things is the principal end of
   this faculty. God gave man the faculty of understanding, chiefly, that
   he might understand divine things.

   The wiser heathens were sensible that the main business of man was the
   improvement and exercise of his understanding. But they knew not the
   object about which the understanding should chiefly be employed. That
   science which many of them thought should chiefly employ the
   understanding, was philosophy; and accordingly they made it their chief
   business to study it. But we who enjoy the light of the gospel are more
   happy; we are not left, as to this particular, in the dark. God hath
   told us about what things we should chiefly employ our understandings,
   having given us a book full of divine instructions, holding forth many
   glorious objects about which all rational creatures should chiefly
   employ their understandings. These instructions are accommodated to
   persons of all capacities and conditions, and proper to be studied, not
   only by men of reaming, but by persons of every character, learned and
   unlearned, young and old, men and women. Therefore the acquisition of
   knowledge in these things should be a main business of all those who
   have the advantage of enjoying the Holy Scriptures.

   2. The truths of divinity are of superlative excellency, and are worthy
   that all should make a business of endeavouring to grow in the
   knowledge of them. They are as much above those things which are
   treated of in other sciences, as heaven is above the earth. God
   himself, the eternal Three in one, is the chief object of this science;
   and next Jesus Christ, as God,man and Mediator, and the glorious work
   of redemption, the most glorious work that ever was wrought: then the
   great things of the heavenly world, the glorious and eternal
   inheritance purchased by Christ, and promised in the gospel; the work
   of the Holy Spirit of God on the hearts of men; our duty to God, and
   the way in which we ourselves may become like angels, and like God
   himself in our measure. All these are objects of this science.

   Such things as these have been the main subject of the study of the
   holy patriarchs, prophets, and apostles, and the most excellent men
   that ever existed; and they are also the subject of study to the angels
   in heaven; 1 Pet. i. 10,12. They are so excellent and worthy to be
   known, that the knowledge of them will richly pay for all the pains and
   labour of an earnest seeking of it. If there were a great treasure of
   gold and pearls accidentally found, and opened with such circumstances
   that all might have as much as they could gather; would not every one
   think it worth his while to make a business of gathering while it
   should last? But that treasure of divine knowledge, which is contained
   in the Scriptures, and is provided for every one to gather to himself
   as much of it as he can, is far more rich than any one of gold and
   pearls. How busy are all sorts of men, all over the world, in getting
   riches! But this knowledge is a far better kind of riches, than that
   after which they so diligently and laboriously pursue.

   3. Divine truths not only concern ministers, but are of infinite
   importance to all Christians. It is not with the doctrine of divinity
   as it is with the doctrines of philosophy and other sciences. These
   last are generally speculative points, which are of little concern in
   human life; and it very little alters the case as to our temporal or
   spiritual interests, whether we know them or not. Philosophers differ
   about them, some being of one opinion, and others of another. And while
   they are engaged in warm disputes about them, others may well leave
   them to dispute among themselves, without troubling their heads much
   about them; it being of little concern to them, whether the one or the
   other be in the right.-But it is not thus in matters of divinity. The
   doctrines of this nearly concern every one. They are about those things
   which relate to every man's eternal salvation and happiness. The common
   people cannot say, Let us leave these matters to ministers and divines;
   let them dispute them out among themselves as they can; they concern
   not us: for they are of infinite importance to every man. Those
   doctrines which relate to the essence, attributes, and subsistencies of
   God, concern all; as it is of infinite importance to common people, as
   well as to ministers, to know what kind of being God is. For he is a
   Being who hath made us all, " in whom we live, and move, and have our
   being;" who is the Lord of all; the Being to whom we are all
   accountable; who is the last end of our being, and the only fountain of
   our happiness.

   The doctrines also which relate to Jesus Christ and his mediation, his
   incarnation, his life and death, his resurrection and ascension, his
   sitting at the right hand of the Father, his satisfaction and
   intercession, infinitely concern common people as well as divines. They
   stand in as much need of this Saviour, and of an interest in his person
   and offices, and the things which he hath done and suffered, as
   ministers and divines.-The same may be said of the doctrines which
   relate to the manner of a sinner's justification, or the way in which
   he becomes interested in the mediation of Christ. They equally concern
   all; for all stand in equal necessity of justification before God. That
   eternal condemnation, to which we are all naturally exposed, is equally
   dreadful. So with respect to those doctrines which relate to the work
   of the Spirit of God on the heart, in the application of redemption in
   our effectual calling and sanctification, all are equally concerned in
   them. There is no doctrine of divinity whatever, which doth not some
   way or other concern the eternal interest of every Christian.

   4. We may argue in favour of the same position, from the great things
   which God hath done in order to give us instruction in these things. As
   to other sciences, he hath left us to ourselves, to the light of our
   own reason. But divine things being of infinitely greater importance to
   us, he hath not left us to an uncertain guide; but hath himself given
   us a revelation of the truth in these matters, and hath done very great
   things to convey and confirm it to us; raising up many prophets in
   different ages, immediately inspiring them with his Holy Spirit, and
   confirming their doctrine with innumerable miracles or wonderful works
   out of the established course of nature. Yea, he raised up a succession
   of prophets, which was upheld for several ages.

   It was very much for this end that God separated the people of Israel,
   in so wonderful a manner, from all other people, and kept them
   separate; that to them he might commit the oracles of God, and that
   from them they might be communicated to the world. He hath also often
   sent angels to bring divine instructions to men; and hath often himself
   appeared in miraculous symbols or representations of his presence: and
   now in these last days hath sent his own Son into the world, to be his
   great prophet, to teach us divine truth. Heb. i. 1, etc. God hath given
   us a book of divine instructions, which contains the sum of divinity.
   Now, these things hath God done, not only for the instruction of
   ministers and men of learning; but for the instruction of all men, of
   all sorts, learned and unlearned, men, women, and children. And
   certainly if God cloth such great things to teach us, we ought to do
   something to learn.

   God giving instructions to men in these things, is not a business by
   the by; but what he hath undertaken and prosecuted in a course of great
   and wonderful dispensations, as an affair in which his heart hath been
   greatly engaged; which is sometimes in Scripture signified by the
   expression of God's rising early to teach us, and to send us prophets
   and teachers. Jer. vii. 25. " Since that day that your fathers came
   forth out of the land of Egypt, unto this day, I have even sent unto
   you all my servants the prophets, daily rising up early, and sending
   them." And ver. 13. " I spake unto you; rising up early, and speaking."
   This is a figurative speech, signifying, that God hath done this as a
   business of great importance, in which he took great care, and had his
   heart much engaged; because persons are wont to rise early to prosecute
   such business as they are earnestly engaged in. --If God hath been so
   engaged in teaching, certainly we should not be negligent in learning;
   but should make growing in knowledge a great part of the business of
   our lives.

   5. It may be argued from the abundance of the instructions which God
   hath given us, from the largeness of that book which God hath given to
   teach us divinity, and from the great variety that is therein
   contained. Much was taught by Moses of old, which we have transmitted
   down to us; after that, other books were from time to time added; much
   is taught us by David and Solomon; and many and excellent are the
   instructions communicated by the prophets: yet God did not think all
   this enough, but after this sent Christ and his apostles, by whom there
   is added a great and excellent treasure to that holy book, which is to
   be our rule in the study of this important subject.

   This book was written for the use of all; all are directed to search
   the Scriptures, John v. 39. " Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
   think ye have eternal life; and they are they that testify of me;" and
   Isa. xxxiv. 16. "Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read." They
   that read and understand are pronounced blessed, Rev. i. 3. " Blessed
   is he that readeth, and they that understand the words of this
   prophecy." If this be true of that particular book of the Revelation,
   much more is it true of the Bible in general. Nor is it to be believed
   that God would have given instructions in such abundance, if he had
   intended that receiving instruction should be only a bye concern with
   us.

   It is to be considered, that all those abundant instructions which are
   contained in the Scriptures were written that they might be understood:
   otherwise they are not instructions. That which is not given that the
   learner may understand it, is not given for the learner's instruction;
   unless we endeavour to grow in the knowledge of divinity, a very great
   part of those instructions will to us be in vain; for we can receive
   benefit by no more of the Scriptures than we understand. We have reason
   to bless God that he hath given us such various and plentiful
   instruction in his word; but we shall be hypocritical in so doing, if
   we after all content ourselves with but little of this instruction.

   When God hath opened a very large treasure before us, for the supply of
   our wants, and we thank him that he hath given us so much; if at the
   same time we be willing to remain destitute of the greatest pare of it,
   because we are too lazy to gather it, this will not show the sincerity
   of our thankfulness. We are now under much greater advantages to
   acquire knowledge in divinity, than the people of God were of old,
   because since that time the canon of Scripture is much increased. But
   if we be negligent of our advantages, we may be never the better for
   them, and may remain with as little knowledge as they.

   6. However diligent we apply ourselves, there is room enough to
   increase our knowledge in divine truth. None have this excuse to make
   for not diligently applying themselves to gain knowledge in divinity,
   that they already know all; nor can they make this excuse, that they
   have no need diligently to apply themselves, in order to know all that
   is to be known. None can excuse themselves for want of business in
   which to employ themselves. There is room enough to employ ourselves
   for ever in this divine science, with the utmost application. Those who
   have applied themselves most closely, have studied the longest, and
   have made the greatest attainments in this knowledge, know but little
   of what is to be known. The subject is inexhaustible. That divine
   Being, who is the main subject of this science, is infinite, and there
   is no end to the glory of his perfections. His works at the same time
   are wonderful, and cannot be found out to perfection; especially the
   work of redemption, about which the science of divinity is chiefly
   conversant, is full of unsearchable wonders.

   The word of God, which is given for our instruction in divinity,
   contains enough in it to employ us to the end of our lives, and then we
   shall leave enough uninvestigated to employ the heads of the ablest
   divines to the end of the world. The psalmist found an end to the
   things that are human; but he could never find an end to what is
   contained in the word of God: Psal. cxix. 96. " I have seen an end to
   all perfection; but thy command is exceeding broad." There is enough in
   this divine science to employ the understandings of saints and angels
   to all eternity.

   7. It doubtless concerns every one to endeavour to excel in the
   knowledge of things which pertain to his profession, or principal
   calling. If it concerns men to excel in any thing, or in any wisdom or
   knowledge at all, it certainly concerns them to excel in the affairs of
   their main profession and work. But the calling and work of every
   Christian is to live to God. This is said to be his high calling, Phil.
   iii. 14. This is the business, and, if I may so speak, the trade of a
   Christian, his main work, and indeed should be his only work. No
   business should be done by a Christian, but as it is some way or other
   a part of this. Therefore certainly the Christian should endeavour to
   be well acquainted with those things which belong to this work, that he
   may fulfill it, and be thoroughly furnished to it.

   It becomes one who is called to be a soldier, to excel in the art of
   war. It becomes a mariner, to excel in the art of navigation. It
   becomes a physician, to excel in the knowledge of those things which
   pertain to the art of physic. So it becomes all such as profess to be
   Christians, and to devote themselves to the practice of Christianity,
   to endeavour to excel in the knowledge of divinity.

   8. It may be argued hence, that God hath appointed an order of men for
   this end, to assist persons in gaining knowledge in these things. He
   hath appointed them to be teachers, 1 Cor. xii. 28. and God hath set
   some in the church; first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly
   teachers: Eph. iv. 11, 12. He gave some apostles, some prophets, some
   evangelists, some pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the
   saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of
   Christ." If God hath set them to be teachers, making that their
   business, then he hath made it their business to impart knowledge. But
   what kind of knowledge? not the knowledge of philosophy, or of human
   laws, or of mechanical arts, but of divinity.

   If God have made it the business of some to be teachers, it will
   follow, that he hath made it the business of others to be learners; for
   teachers and learners are correlates, one of which was never intended
   to be without the other. God hath never made it the duty of some to
   take pains to teach those who are not obliged to take pains to learn.
   He hath not commanded ministers to spend themselves, in order to impart
   knowledge to those who are not obliged to apply themselves to receive
   it.

   The name by which Christians are commonly called in the New Testament
   is disciples, the signification of which word is scholars or learners.
   All Christians are put into the school of Christ, where their business
   is to learn, or receive knowledge from Christ, their common master and
   teacher, and from those inferior teachers appointed by him to instruct
   in his name.

   9. God hath in the Scriptures plainly revealed it to be his will, that
   all Christians should diligently endeavour to excel in the knowledge of
   divine things. It is the revealed will of God, that Christians should
   not only have some knowledge of things of this nature, but that they
   should be enriched with all knowledge: 1 Cor. i. 4, 5. " I thank my God
   always on your behalf, for the grace of God that is given you by Jesus
   Christ, that in every thing ye are enriched by him, in all utterance,
   and in all knowledge." So the apostle earnestly prayed, that the
   Christian Philippians might abound more and more, not only in love, but
   in Christian knowledge; Phil. i. 9. " And this I pray, that your love
   may abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment." So the
   apostle Peter advises to " give all diligence to add to faith virtue,
   and to virtue knowledge," 2 Pet. i. 5, and the apostle Paul, in the
   next chapter to that wherein is the text, counsels the christian
   Hebrews, leaving the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, to go
   on to perfection. He would by no means have them always to rest only in
   those fundamental doctrines of repentance, and faith, and the
   resurrection from the dead, and the eternal judgment, in which they
   were instructed when baptized, at their first initiation in
   Christianity. (See Heb. vi., etc.)

   SECT. V
   An exhortation that all may diligently endeavour to gain Christian
   knowledge

   CONSIDER yourselves as scholars or disciples, put into the school of
   Christ; and therefore be diligent to make proficiency in christian
   knowledge. Content not yourselves with this, that you have been taught
   your catechism in your childhood, and that you know as much of the
   principles of religion as is necessary to salvation; else you will be
   guilty of what the apostle warns against, viz. going no further than
   laying the foundation of repentance from dead works, etc.

   You are all called to be Christians, and this is your profession.
   Endeavour, therefore, to acquire knowledge in things which pertain to
   your profession. Let not your teachers have cause to complain, that
   while they spend and are spent, to impart knowledge to you, you take
   little pains to learn. It is a great encouragement to an instructor, to
   have such to teach as make a business of learning, bending their minds
   to it. This makes teaching a pleasure, when otherwise it will be a very
   heavy and burdensome task.

   You all have by you a large treasure of divine knowledge, in that you
   have the Bible in your hands; therefore be not contented in possessing
   but little of this treasure. God hath spoken much to you in the
   Scriptures; labour to understand as much of what he saith as you can.
   God hath made you all reasonable creatures; therefore let not the noble
   faculty of reason or understanding lie neglected. Content not
   yourselves with having so much knowledge as is thrown in your way, and
   receive in some sense unavoidably by the frequent inculcation of divine
   truth in the preaching of the word, of which you are obliged to be
   hearers, or accidentally gain in conversation; but let it be very much
   your business to search for it, and that with the same diligence and
   labour with which men are wont to dig in mines of silver and gold.

   Especially I would advise those who are young to employ themselves in
   this way. Men are never too old to learn; but the time of youth is
   especially the time for learning; it is peculiarly proper for gaining
   and storing up knowledge.--Further, to stir up all, both old and young,
   to this duty, let me entreat you to consider,

   1. If you apply yourselves diligently to this work, you will not want
   employment, when you are at leisure from your common secular business.
   In this way, you may find something in which you may profitably employ
   yourselves. You will find something else to do, besides going about
   from house to house, spending one hour after another in unprofitable
   conversation, or, at best, to no other purpose but to amuse yourselves,
   to fill up and wear away your time. And it is to be feared that very
   much of the time spent in evening visits, is spent to a much worse
   purpose than that which I have now mentioned. Solomon tells us, Prov.
   x. 19. "That in the multitude of words, there wanteth not sin." And is
   not this verified in those who find little else to do but to go to one
   another's houses, and spend the time in such talk as comes next, or
   such as any one's present disposition happens to suggest?

   Some diversion is doubtless lawful; but for Christians to spend so much
   of their time, so many long evenings, in no other conversation than
   that which tends to divert and amuse, if nothing worse, is a sinful way
   of spending time, and tends to poverty of soul at least, if not to
   outward poverty: Prov. xiv. 23. " In all labour there is profit; but
   the talk of the lips tendeth only to penury." Besides, when persons for
   so much of their time have nothing else to do, but to sit, and talk,
   and chat, there is great danger of falling into foolish and sinful
   conversation, venting their corrupt dispositions, in talking against
   others, expressing their jealousies and evil surmises concerning their
   neighbours; not considering what Christ hath said, Matt. xii. 36, " Of
   every idle word that men shall speak, shall they give account in the
   day of judgment."

   If you would comply with what you have heard from this doctrine, you
   would find something else to employ your time besides contention, or
   talking about those public affairs which tend to contention. Young
   people might find something else to do, besides spending their time in
   vain company; something that would be much more profitable to
   themselves, as it would really turn to some good account; something, in
   doing which they would both be more out of the way of temptation, and
   be more in the way of duty, and of a divine blessing. And even aged
   people would have something to employ themselves in, after they are
   become incapable of bodily labour. Their time, as is now often the
   case, would not lie heavy upon their hands, as they would with both
   profit and pleasure be engaged in searching the Scriptures, and in
   comparing and meditating upon the various truths which they should find
   there.

   2. This would be a noble way of spending your time.--The Holy Spirit
   gives the Bereans this epithet, because they diligently employed
   themselves in this business: Acts xvii. 11. "These were more noble than
   those of Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all
   readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those
   things were so." Similar to this is very much the employment of heaven.
   The inhabitants of that world spend much of their time in searching
   into the great things of divinity, and endeavouring to acquire
   knowledge in them, as we are told of the angels, 1 Pet. i. 12. " Which
   things the angels desire to look into." This will be very agreeable to
   what you hope will be your business to all eternity, as you doubtless
   hope to join in the same employment with the angels of light. Solomon
   says, Prov. xxv. 2. " It is the honour of kings to search out a
   matter;" and certainly, above all others, to search out divine matters.
   Now, if this be the honour even of kings, is it not much more your
   honour?

   3. This is a pleasant way of improving time. Knowledge is pleasant and
   delightful to intelligent creatures, and above all, the knowledge of
   divine things; for in them are the most excellent truths, and the most
   beautiful and amiable objects held forth to view. However tedious the
   labour necessarily attending this business may be, yet the knowledge
   once obtained will richly requite the pains taken to obtain it. " When
   wisdom entereth the heart, knowledge is pleasant to the soul." Prov.
   ii. 10.

   4. This knowledge is exceedingly useful in Christian practice. Such as
   have much knowledge in divinity have great means and advantages for
   spiritual and saving knowledge; for no means of grace have a saving
   effect, otherwise than by the knowledge they impart. The more you have
   of a rational knowledge of divine things, the more opportunity will
   there be, when the Spirit shall be breathed into your heart, to see the
   excellency of these things, and to taste the sweetness of them. The
   heathens, who have no rational knowledge of the things of the gospel,
   have no opportunity to see the excellency of them; and therefore the
   more rational knowledge of these things you have, the more opportunity
   and advantage you have to see the divine excellency and glory of them.

   Again, The more knowledge you have of divine things, the better will
   you know your duty; your knowledge will be of great use to direct you
   as to your duty in particular cases. You will also be the better
   furnished against the temptations of the devil. For the devil often
   takes advantage of persons' ignorance to ply them with temptations
   which otherwise would have no hold of them. By having much knowledge,
   you will be under greater advantages to conduct yourselves with
   prudence and discretion in your Christian course, and so to live much
   more to the honour of God and religion. Many who mean well, and are
   full of a good spirit, yet for want of prudence, conduct themselves so
   as to wound religion. Many have a zeal of God, which cloth more hurt
   than good, because it is not according to knowledge, Rom. X. 2. The
   reason why many good men behave no better in many instances, is not so
   much that they want grace, as that they want knowledge. Beside, an
   increase of knowledge would be a great help to profitable conversation.
   It would supply you with matter for conversation when you come
   together, or when you visit your neighbours: and so you would have less
   temptation to spend the time in such conversation as tends to your own
   and others' hurt.

   5. Consider the advantages you are under to grow in the knowledge of
   divinity. We are under far greater advantages to gain much of this
   knowledge now, than God's people under the Old Testament, both because
   the canon of Scripture is so much enlarged since that time, and also
   because evangelical truths are now so much more plainly revealed. So
   that common men are now in some respects under advantages to know more,
   than the greatest prophets were then. Thus that saying of Christ is in
   a sense applicable to us, Luke x. 23, 24. " Blessed are the eyes which
   see the things which ye see. For I tell you, that many prophets and
   kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen
   them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them."
   We are in some respects under far greater advantages for gaining
   knowledge, now in these latter ages of the church, than Christians were
   formerly; especially by reason of the art of printing, of which God
   hath given us the benefit, whereby Bibles and other books of divinity
   are exceedingly multiplied, and persons may now be furnished with helps
   for the obtaining of Christian knowledge, at a much easier and cheaper
   rate than they formerly could.

   6. We know not what opposition we may meet with in the religious
   principles which we hold. We know that there are many adversaries to
   the gospel and its truths. If therefore we embrace those truths, we
   must expect to be attacked by the said adversaries; and unless we be
   well informed concerning divine things, how shall we be able to defend
   ourselves? Beside, the apostle Paul enjoins it upon us, always to be
   ready to give an answer to every man who asketh us a reason of the hope
   that is in us. But this we cannot expect to do without considerable
   knowledge in divine things.

   SECT. VI
   Directions for the acquisition of Christian knowledge

   1. BE assiduous in reading the Holy Scriptures. This is the fountain
   whence all knowledge in divinity must be derived.

   Therefore let not this treasure lie by you neglected. Every man of
   common understanding who can read, may, if he please, become well
   acquainted with the Scriptures. And what an excellent attainment would
   this be!

   2. Content not yourselves with only a cursory reading, without
   regarding the sense. This is an ill way of reading, to which, however,
   many accustom themselves all their days. When you read, observe what
   you read. Observe how things come in. Take notice of the drift of the
   discourse, and compare one scripture with another. For the Scripture,
   by the harmony of its different; parts, casts great light upon
   itself.--We are expressly directed by Christ, to search the Scriptures,
   which evidently intends something more than a mere cursory reading. And
   use means to find out the meaning of the Scripture. When you have it
   explained in the preaching of the word, take notice of it; and if at
   any time a scripture that you did not understand be cleared up to your
   satisfaction, mark it, lay it up, and if possible remember it.

   3. Procure, and diligently use, other books which may help you to grow
   in this knowledge. There are many excellent books extant, which might
   greatly forward you in this knowledge, and afford you a very profitable
   and pleasant entertainment in your leisure hours. There is doubtless a
   great defect in many, that through a lothness to be at a little
   expense, they furnish themselves with no more helps of this nature.
   They have a few books indeed, which now and then on sabbath-days they
   read; but they have had them so long, and read them so often, that they
   are weary of them, and it is now become a dull story, a mere task to
   read them.

   4. Improve conversation with others to this end. How much might persons
   promote each other's knowledge in divine things, if they would improve
   conversation as they might; if men that are ignorant were not ashamed
   to show their ignorance, and were willing to learn of others; if those
   that have knowledge would communicate it, without pride and
   ostentation; and if all were more disposed to enter on such
   conversation as would be for their mutual edification and instruction.

   5. Seek not to grow in knowledge chiefly for the sake of applause, and
   to enable you to dispute with others; but seek it for the benefit of
   your souls, and in order to practice.--If applause be your end, you
   will not be so likely to be led to the knowledge of the truth, but may
   justly, as often is the case of those who are proud of their knowledge,
   be led into error to your own perdition. This being your end, if you
   should obtain much rational knowledge, it would not be likely to be of
   any benefit to you, but would puff you up with pride: 1 Cor. viii. 1. "
   Knowledge puffeth up."

   6. Seek to God, that he would direct you, and bless you, in this
   pursuit after knowledge. This is the apostle's direction, James i. 5. "
   If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, who giveth to all
   liberally, and upbraideth not." God is the fountain of all divine
   knowledge: Prov. ii. 6. "The Lord giveth wisdom: out of his mouth
   cometh knowledge and understanding." Labour to be sensible of your own
   blindness and ignorance, and your need of the help of God, lest you be
   led into error, instead of true knowledge: 1 Cor. iii. 18. " If any man
   would be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be wise."

   7. Practice according to what knowledge you have. This will be the way
   to know more. The psalmist warmly recommends this way of seeking
   knowledge in divine truth, from his own experience: Psal. cxix. 100. "
   I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts."
   Christ also recommends the same: John vii. 17. "If any man will do his
   will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I
   speak of myself."
     __________________________________________________________________

The Manner in Which the Salvation of the Soul is to be Sought

    Genesis 6:22 -- Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so
    did he.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Concerning these words, I would observe three things:

   1. What it was that God commanded Noah, to which these words refer. It
   was the building of an ark according to the particular direction of
   God, against the time when the flood of waters should come; and the
   laying up of food for himself, his family, and the other animals, which
   were to be preserved in the ark. We have the particular commands which
   God gave him respecting this affair, from the 14th verse, "Make thee an
   ark of gopher wood," &c

   2. We may observe the special design of the work which God had enjoined
   upon Noah: it was to save himself and his family, when the rest of the
   world should be drowned. See ver. 17, 18. We may observe Noah's
   obedience. He obeyed God: thus did Noah. And his obedience was thorough
   and universal: according to all that God commanded him, so did he. He
   not only began, but he went through his work, which God had commanded
   him to undertake for his salvation from the flood. To this obedience
   the apostle refers in Heb. 11:7, "By faith Noah, being warned of God of
   things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving
   of his house.

  DOCTRINE.

   We should be willing to engage in and go through great undertakings, in
   order to our own salvation.

   The building of the ark, which was enjoined upon Noah, that he and his
   family might be saved, was a great undertaking: the ark was a building
   of vast size; the length of it being three hundred cubits, the breadth
   of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits. A cubit, till
   of late, was by learned men reckoned to be equal to a foot and a half
   of our measure. But lately some learned men of our nation have
   travelled into Egypt, and other ancient countries, and have measured
   some ancient buildings there, which are of several thousand years
   standing, and of which ancient histories give us the dimensions in
   cubits; particularly the pyramids of Egypt, which are standing entire
   at this day. By measuring these, and by comparing the measure in feet
   with the ancient accounts of their measure in cubits, a cubit is found
   to be almost two and twenty inches. Therefore learned men more lately
   reckon a cubit much larger than they did formerly. So that the ark,
   reckoned so much larger every way, will appear to be almost of double
   the bulk which was formerly ascribed to it According to this
   computation of the cubit, it was more than five hundred and fifty feet
   long, about ninety feet broad, and about fifty feet in height.

   To build such a structure, with all those apartments and divisions in
   it which were necessary, and in such a manner as to be fit to float
   upon the water for so long a time, was then a great undertaking. It
   took Noah, with all the workmen he employed, a hundred and twenty
   years, or thereabouts, to build it For so long it was, that the Spirit
   of God strove, and the long-suffering God waited on the old world, as
   you may see in Gen. 4:3: "My Spirit shall I not always strive with man;
   yet his days shall be a hundred and twenty years." All this while the
   ark was a preparing, as appears by 1 Pet. 3:20: "When once the
   long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a
   preparing." It was a long time that Noah constantly employed himself in
   this business. Men would esteem that undertaking very great, which
   should keep them constantly employed even for one half of that time.
   Noah must have had a great and constant care upon his mind for these
   one hundred and twenty years, in superintending this work, and in
   seeing that all was done exactly according to the directions which God
   had given him.

   Not only was Noah himself continually employed, but it required a great
   number of workmen to be constantly employed, during all that time, in
   procuring, and collecting, and fitting the materials, and in putting
   them together in due form. How great a thing was it for Noah to
   undertake such a work! For beside the continual care and labor, it was
   a work of vast expense. It is not probable that any of that wicked
   generation would put to a finger to help forward such a work, which
   doubtless they believed was merely the fruit of Noah's folly, without
   full wages. Noah must needs have been very rich, to be able to bear the
   expense of such a work, and to pay so many workmen for so long a time.
   It would have been a very great expense for a prince; and doubtless
   Noah was very rich, as Abraham and Job were afterwards. But it is
   probable that Noah spent all his worldly substance in this work, thus
   manifesting his faith in the word of God, by selling all he had, as
   believing there would surely come a flood, which would destroy all; so
   that if he should keep what he had, it would be of no service to him.
   Herein he has set us an example, showing us how we ought to sell all
   for our salvation.

   Noah's undertaking was of great difficulty, as it exposed him to the
   continual reproaches of all his neighbors, for that whole one hundred
   and twenty years. None of them believed what he told them of a flood
   which was about to drown the world. For a man to undertake such a vast
   piece of work, under notion that it should be the means of saving him
   when the world should be destroyed, it made him the continual
   laughing-stock of the world. When he was about to hire workmen,
   doubtless all laughed at him, and we may suppose, that though the
   workmen consented to work for wages, yet they laughed at the folly of
   him who employed them. When the ark was begun, we may suppose that
   every one that passed by and saw such a huge bulk stand there, laughed
   at, it, calling it Noah's folly.

   In these days, men are with difficulty brought to do or submit to that
   which makes them the objects of the reproach of all their neighbors.
   Indeed if while some reproach them, others stand by them and honor
   them, this will support them. But it is very difficult for a man to go
   on in a way wherein he makes himself the laughing stock of the whole
   world, and wherein he can find none who do not despise him. Where is
   the man that can stand the shock of such a trial for twenty years?
   But in such an undertaking as this, Noah at the divine direction,
   engaged and went through it, that himself and his family might be saved
   from the common destruction which was shortly about to come on the
   world. He began, and also made an end: "According to all that God
   commanded him, so did he." Length of time did not weary him: he did not
   grow weary of his vast expense. He stood the shock of the derision of
   all his neighbors; and of all the world year after year: he did not
   grow weary of being their laughing-stock, so as to give over his
   enterprise; but persevered in it till the ark was finished. After this,
   he was at the trouble and charge of procuring stores for the
   maintenance of his family, and of all the various kinds of creatures,
   for so long a time. Such an undertaking he engaged in and went through
   in order to a temporal salvation. How great an undertaking then should
   men be willing to engage in and go through in order to their eternal
   salvation! A salvation from an eternal deluge; from being overwhelmed
   with the billows of God's wrath of which Noah's flood was but a shadow.

   I shall particularly handle this doctrine under the three following
   propositions.

   I. There is a work or business which must be undertaken and
   accomplished by men, if they would be saved.
   II. This business is a great undertaking.
   III. Men should be willing to enter upon and go through this
   undertaking though it be great, seeing it is for their own salvation.
   Proposition. There is a work or business which men must enter upon and
   accomplish, in order to their salvation.-Men have no reason to expect
   to be saved in idleness, or to go to heaven in a way of doing nothing.
   No; in order to it, there is a great work, which must be not only
   begun, but finished-I shall speak upon this proposition, in answer to
   two inquiries.

   I. What is this work or business which must be undertaken and
   accomplished in order to the salvation of men?
   Answer. It is the work of seeking salvation in a way of constant
   observance of all the duty to which God directs its in his word. If we
   would be saved, we must seek salvation. For although men do not obtain
   heaven of themselves; they do not go thither accidentally, or without
   any intention or endeavors of their own. God, in his word, hath
   directed men to seek their salvation as they would hope to obtain it.
   There is a race that is set before them, which they must run, and in
   that race come off victors, in order to their winning the prize.

   The Scriptures have told us what particular duties must be performed by
   us in order to our salvation. It is not sufficient that men seek their
   salvation on in the observance of some of those duties; but they must
   be observed universally. The work we have to do is not an obedience
   only to some, but to all the commands of God; a compliance with every
   institution of worship; a diligent use of all the appointed means of
   grace; a doing of all duty towards God and towards man.-It is not
   sufficient that men have some respect to all the commands of God, and
   that they may be said to seek their salvation in some sort of
   observance of all the commands; but they must be devoted to it.

   They must not make this a business by the by, or a thing in which they
   are negligent and careless, or which they do with a slack hand; but it
   must be their great business, being attended to as their great concern.
   They must not only seek, but strive; they must do what their hand
   findeth to do with their might, as men thoroughly engaged in their
   minds, and influenced and set forward by great desire and strong
   resolution. They must act as those that see so much of the importance
   of religion above all other things, that every thing else must be as an
   occasional affair, and nothing must stand in competition with its
   duties. This must be the one thing they do; Phil. 3:13, "This one thing
   I do."-It must be the business to which they make all other affairs
   give place, and to which they are ready to make other things a
   sacrifice. They must be ready to part with pleasures and honor, estate
   and life, and to sell all, that they may successfully accomplish this
   business.

   It is required of every man, that he not only do something in this
   business, but that he should devote himself to it; which implies that
   he should give up himself to it, all his affairs, and all his temporal
   enjoyments. This is the import of taking up the cross, of taking
   Christ's yoke upon us, and of denying ourselves to follow Christ. The
   rich young man, who came kneeling to Christ to know what he should do
   to he saved, Mark 10:17, in some sense sought salvation but did not
   obtain it. In some sense he kept all the commands from his youth up;
   but was not cordially devoted to this business. He had not made a
   sacrifice to it of all his enjoyments, as appeared when Christ came to
   try him; he would not part with his estate for him.

   It is not only necessary that men should seem to he very much engaged,
   and appear as if they were devoted to their duty for a little while;
   but there must be a constant devotedness, in a persevering way, as Noah
   was to the business of the building the ark, going on with that great,
   difficult, and expensive affair, till it was finished, and till the
   flood came. Men must not only be diligent in the use of the means of
   grace, and be anxiously engaged to escape eternal ruin, till they
   obtain hope and comfort; but afterwards they must persevere in the
   duties of religion, till the flood come, the flood of death. Not only
   must the faculties, strength, and possessions of men be devoted to this
   work, but also their time and their lives; they must give up their
   whole lives to it, even to the very day when God causes the storms and
   floods to come. This is the work or business which men have to do in
   order to their salvation.

   Inquiry 2. Why is it needful that men should undertake to go through
   such a work in order to their salvation?

   Answer 1. Not to merit salvation, or to recommend them to the saving
   mercy of God. Men are not saved on the account of any work of theirs,
   and yet they are not saved without works. If we merely consider what it
   is for which, or on the account of which, men are saved, no work at all
   in men is necessary to their salvation. In this respect they are saved
   wholly without any work of theirs: Tit. iii. 5, "Not by works of
   righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved
   us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost." We
   must indeed be saved on the account of works; but not our own. It is on
   account of the works which Christ hath done for us. Works are the fixed
   price of eternal life; it is fixed by an eternal, unalterable rule of
   righteousness. But since the fall there is no hope of our doing these
   works, without salvation offered freely without money and without
   price. But,

   2. Though it be not needful that we do any thing to merit salvation,
   which Christ hath fully merited for all who believe in him; yet God,
   for wise and holy ends, hath appointed, that we should come to final
   salvation in no other way, but that of good works done by us. God did
   not save Noah on account of the labor and expense he was at in building
   the ark. Noah's salvation from the flood was an instance of the free
   and distinguishing mercy of God. Nor did God stand in need of Noah's
   care, or cost, or labor, to build an ark. The same power which created
   the world, and which brought the flood of waters upon the earth, could
   have made the ark in an instant, without any care or cost to Noah, or
   any of the labor of those workmen who were employed for so long a time.
   Yet God was pleased to appoint, that Noah should be saved in this way.
   So God hath appointed that man should not be saved without his
   undertaking and doing this work of which I have been speaking; and
   therefore we are commanded "to work out our own salvation with fear and
   trembling," Philip. 2:12.

   There are many wise ends to be answered by the establishment of such a
   work as prerequisite to salvation. The glory of God requires it. For
   although God stand in no need of any thing that men do to recommend
   them to his saving mercy, yet it would reflect much on the glory of
   God's wisdom and holiness, to bestow salvation on men in such a way as
   tends to encourage them in sloth and wickedness; or in any other way
   than that which tends to promote diligence and holiness. Man was made
   capable of action, with many powers of both body and mind fitting him
   for it. He was made for business and not idleness and the main business
   for which he was made, was that of religion. Therefore it becomes the
   wisdom of God to bestow salvation and happiness on man in such a way as
   tends most to promote his end in this respect, and, to stir him up to a
   diligent use of his faculties and talents.

   It becomes the wisdom of God so to order it, that things of great value
   and importance should not be obtained without great labor and
   diligence. Much human learning and great moral accomplishments are not
   to be obtained without care and labor. It is wisely so ordered, in
   order to maintain in man a due sense of the value of those things which
   are excellent. If great things were in common easily obtained, it would
   have a tendency to cause men to slight and undervalue them. Men
   commonly despise those things which are cheap, and which are obtained
   without difficulty.

   Although the work of obedience performed by men, be not necessary in
   order to merit salvation; yet it is necessary in order to their being
   prepared for it. Men cannot be prepared for salvation without seeking
   it in such a way as hath been described. This is necessary in order
   that they have a proper sense of their own necessities, and
   unworthiness; and in order that they be prepared and disposed to prize
   salvation when bestowed, and be properly thankful to God for it. The
   requisition of so great a work in order to our salvation is no way
   inconsistent with the freedom of the offer of salvation; as after all
   it is both offered and bestowed without any respect to our work, as the
   price or meritorious cause of our salvation, as I have already
   explained. Besides, salvation bestowed in this way is better for us,
   more for our advantage and happiness both in this and the future world,
   than if it were given without this requisition.

   II. Proposition. This work or business, which must be done in order to
   the salvation of men, is a great undertaking. It often appears so to
   men upon whom it is urged. Utterly to break off from all their sins,
   and to give up themselves forever to the business of religion, without
   making a reserve of any one lust, submitting to and complying with
   every command of God, in all cases, and persevering therein, appears to
   many so great a thing, that they are in vain urged to undertake it. In
   so doing it seems to them, that they should give up themselves to a
   perpetual bondage. The greater part of men therefore choose to put it
   off, and keep it at as great a distance as they can. They cannot bear
   to think of entering immediately on such a hard service, and rather
   than do it, they will run the risk of eternal damnation, by putting it
   off to an uncertain future opportunity.

   Although the business of religion is far from really being as it
   appears to such men, or the devil will be sure, if he can, to represent
   it in false colors to sinners, and make it appear as black and as
   terrible as he can; yet it is indeed a great business, a great
   undertaking, and it is fit that all who are urged to it should count
   the cost beforehand, and be sensible of the difficulty attending it.
   For though the devil discourages many from this undertaking, by
   representing it to be more difficult than it really is; yet with others
   he takes a contrary course and flatters them it is a very easy thing, a
   trivial business, which may be done at any time when they please, and
   so emboldens them to defer it from that consideration. But let none
   conceive any other notion of that business of religion, which is
   absolutely necessary to their salvation, than that it is a great
   undertaking. It is so on the following accounts.

   1. It is a business of great labor and care. There are many commands to
   be obeyed, many duties to be done, duties to God, duties to our
   neighbor, and duties, to ourselves. There is much opposition in the way
   of these duties from without. There is a subtle and powerful adversary
   laying all manner of blocks in the way. There are innumerable
   temptations of Satan to be resisted and repelled. There is great
   opposition from the world, innumerable snares laid, on every side, many
   rocks and mountains to be passed over, many streams to be passed
   through, and many flatteries and enticements from a vain world to be
   resisted. There is a great opposition from within; a dull and sluggish
   heart, which is exceedingly averse from that activity in religion which
   is necessary; a carnal heart, which is averse from religion and
   spiritual exercises, and continually drawing the contrary way; and a
   proud and a deceitful heart, in which corruption will be exerting
   itself in all manner of ways. So that nothing can be done to any effect
   without a most strict and careful watch, great labor and strife.

   2. It is a constant in business.-In that business which requires great
   labor, men love now and then to have a space of relaxation, that they
   may rest from their extraordinary labor. But this is a business which
   must be followed every day. Luke ix. 23, " If any man will come after
   me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily and follow me."
   We must never give ourselves any relaxation from this business; it must
   be continually prosecuted day after day. If sometimes we make a great
   stir and bustle concerning religion, but then lay all aside to take our
   ease, and do so from time to time, it will be of no good effect; we had
   even as good do nothing at all. The business of religion so followed is
   never like to come to any good issue, nor is the work ever like to be
   accomplished to any good purpose.

   3. It is a great undertaking, as it is an undertaking of great
   expense.-We must, therein sell all: we must follow this business at the
   expense of all our unlawful pleasures and delights, at the expense of
   our carnal ease, often at the expense of our substance, of our credit
   among men, the good will of our neighbors, at the expense of all our
   earthly friends, and even at the expense of life itself. Herein it is
   like Noah's undertaking to build the ark, which, as hath been shown was
   a costly undertaking: it was expensive to his reputation among men,
   exposing him to be the continual laughing-stock of all his neighbors
   and of the whole world: and it was expensive to his estate, and
   probably cost him all that he had.

   4. Sometimes the fear, trouble, and exercise of mind, which are
   undergone respecting this business, and the salvation of the soul, are
   great and long continued, before any comfort is obtained. Sometimes
   persons in this situation labor long in the dark, and sometimes, as it
   were, in the very fire, they having great distress of conscience, great
   fears, and many perplexing temptations, before they obtain light and
   comfort to make their care and labor more easy to them. They sometimes
   earnestly, and for a long time, seek comfort, but find it not, because
   they seek it not in a right manner, nor in the right objects. God
   therefore hides his face. They cry, but God doth not answer their
   prayers. They strive, but all seems in vain. They seem to themselves
   not at all to get forward, or nearer to a deliverance from sin: but to
   go backward, rather than forward. They see no glimmerings of light:
   things rather appear darker and darker. Insomuch that they are often
   ready to be discouraged, and to sink under the weight of their present
   distress, and under the prospect of future misery. In this situation,
   and under these views, some are almost driven to despair. Many, after
   they have obtained some saving comfort, are again involved in darkness
   and trouble. It is with them as it was with the Christian Hebrews, Heb.
   10:32, "After ye were illuminated ye endured a great fight of
   afflictions. Some through a melancholy habit and distemper of body,
   together with Satan's temptations, spend a great part of their lives in
   distress and darkness, even after they have had some saving comfort.

   5. It is a business which, by reason of the many difficulties, snares,
   and dangers that attend it, requires much instruction, consideration,
   and counsel. There is no business wherein men stand in need of counsel
   more than in this. It is a difficult undertaking, a hard matter to
   proceed aright in it. There are ten thousand wrong ways, which men may
   take; there are many labyrinths wherein many poor souls are entangled
   and never find the way out ; there are many rocks on which thousands of
   souls have suffered shipwreck, for want of, having steered aright.

   Men of themselves know not how to proceed in this business, any more
   than the children of Israel in the wilderness knew where to go without
   the guidance, of the pillar of cloud and fire. There is great need that
   they search the Scriptures, and give diligent heed to the instructions
   and directions contained in them, as to a light shining in a dark place
   and that they ask counsel of those skilled in these matters. And there
   is no business in which men have so much need of seeking to God by
   prayer, for his counsel, and that he would lead them in the right way,
   and show them the strait gate. " For strait is the gate and narrow is
   the way which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it;" yea,
   there are none that find it without direction from heaven. The building
   of the ark was a work of great difficulty on this account, that Noah's
   wisdom was not sufficient to direct him how to make such a building as
   should be a sufficient security against such a flood, and which should
   be a convenient dwelling-place for himself, his family, and all the
   various kinds of beasts and birds, and creeping things. Nor could he
   ever have known how to construct this building, had not God directed
   him.

   6. This business never ends till life ends. They that undertake this
   laborious, careful, expensive, self-denying business, must not expect
   to rest from their labors, till death shall have put an end to them.
   The long continuance of the work which Noah undertook was what
   especially made it a great undertaking. This also was what made the
   travel of the children of Israel through the wilderness appear so great
   to them, that it was continued for so long a time. Their spirits
   failed, they were discouraged, and had not a heart to go through with
   so great an undertaking. But such is this business that it runs
   parallel with life, whether it be longer or shorter. Although we should
   live to a great age, our race and warfare will not be finished till
   death shall come. We must not expect that an end will be put to our
   labor, and care, and strife, by any hope of a good estate which we may
   obtain. Past attainments and past success will not excuse us from what
   remains for the future, nor will they make future constant labor and
   care unnecessary to our salvation.

   III. Men should be willing to engage in and go through this business,
   however great and difficult it may seem to them, seeing it is for their
   own salvation. Because,

   1. A deluge of wrath will surely come. The inhabitants of the old world
   would not believe that there would come such a flood of waters upon the
   earth as that of which Noah told them, though he told them often;
   neither would they take any care to avoid the destruction. Yet such a
   deluge did come; nothing of all those things of which Noah had
   forewarned them, failed.
   So there will surely come a more dreadful deluge of divine wrath on
   this wicked world. We are often forewarned of it in the Scriptures, and
   the world, as then, doth not believe any such thing. Yet the
   threatening will as certainly be accomplished, as the threatening
   denounced against the old world. A day of wrath is coming; it will come
   at its appointed season; it will not tarry, it
   shall not be delayed one moment beyond its appointed time.

   2. All such as do not seasonably undertake and go through the great
   work mentioned will surely be swallowed up in this deluge. When the
   floods of wrath shall come, they will universally overwhelm the wicked
   world: all such as shall not have taken care to prepare an ark, will
   surely be swallowed up in it; they will find no other way of escape. In
   vain shall salvation be expected from the hills, and from the multitude
   of mountains; for the flood shall be above the tops of all the
   mountains. Or if they shall hide themselves in the caves and dens of
   the mountains, there the waters of the flood will find them out, and
   there shall they miserably perish. As those of the old world who were
   not in the ark perished, Gen. 7:21, 23, so all who shall not have
   secured to themselves a place in the spiritual ark of the gospel, shall
   perish much more miserably than the old world. Doubtless the
   inhabitants of the old world had many contrivances to save themselves.
   Some, we may suppose, ascended to the tops of their houses, being
   driven out of one story to another, till at last they perished. Others
   climbed to the tops of high towers; who yet were washed thence by the
   boisterous waves of the rising flood. Some climbed to the tops of
   trees; others to the tops of mountains, and especially of the highest
   mountains. But all was in vain; the flood sooner or later swallowed
   them all up; only Noah and his family, who had taken care to prepare an
   ark, remained alive. So it will doubtless be at the end of the world,
   when Christ shall dome to judge the world in righteousness. Some, when
   they shall look up and see him coming in the clouds of heaven, shall
   hide themselves in closets, and secret places in their houses. Others
   flying to the caves and dens of the earth, shall attempt to hide
   themselves there. Others shall call upon the rocks and mountains to
   fall on them, and cover them from the face of him that sitteth on the
   throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.-So it will be after the
   sentence is pronounced, and wicked men see that terrible fire coming,
   which is to burn this world forever, and which will be a deluge of
   fire, and will burn the earth even to the bottoms of the mountains, and
   to its very centre. Deut. 32:22, "For a fire is kindled in mine anger,
   and shall burn to the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her
   increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains." I say,
   when the wicked shall, after the sentence, see this great fire
   beginning to kindle, and to take hold of this earth; there will be many
   contrivances devised by them to escape, some flying to caves and holes
   in the earth, some hiding themselves in one place, and some in another.
   But let them hide themselves where they will, or let them do what they
   will, it will be utterly in vain. Every cave shall burn as an oven, the
   rocks and mountains shall melt with fervent heat, and if they could
   creep down to the very centre of the earth, still the heat would follow
   them, and rage with as much vehemence there, as on the very surface.

   So when wicked men, who neglect their great work in their lifetime, who
   are not willing to go through the difficulty and labor of this work,
   draw near to death, they sometimes do many things to escape death, and
   put forth many endeavors to lengthen out their lives at least a little
   longer. For this end, they send for physicians, and perhaps many are
   consulted, and their prescriptions are punctually observed. They also
   use many endeavors to save their souls from hell. They cry to God;.
   they confess their past sins; they promise future reformation; and, Oh
   what would they not give for some small addition to their lives, or
   some hope of future happiness! But all proves in vain: God hath
   numbered their days and finished them; and as they have sinned away the
   day of grace, they must even bear the consequence, and forever lie down
   in sorrow.

   3. The destruction, when it shall come, will be infinitely terrible.
   The destruction of the old world by the flood was terrible; but that
   eternal destruction which is coming on the wicked is infinitely more
   so. That flood of waters was but an image of this awful flood of divine
   vengeance. When the waters poured down, more like spouts or cataracts,
   or the fall of a great river, than like rain; what an awful appearance
   was there of the wrath of God! This however but an image of that
   terrible outpouring of the wrath of God which shall be forever, yea
   forever and ever, on wicked men. And when the fountains of the great
   deep were broken up, and the waters burst forth out of the ground
   though they had issued out of the womb (Job38:8), this was an image of
   the mighty breakings forth of God's wrath, which shall be, when the
   flood gates of wrath shall be drawn up. How may we suppose that the
   wicked of the old world repented that they had not hearkened to the
   warnings which Noah had given them, when they saw these dreadful
   things, and saw that they must perish! How much more will you repent
   your refusing to hearken to the gracious warnings of the gospel, when
   you shall see the fire of God's wrath against you, pouring down from
   heaven, and bursting on all sides out of bowels of the earth!

   4. Though the work which is necessary in order to man's salvation be a
   great work, yet it is not impossible. What was required of Noah,
   doubtless appeared a very great and difficult undertaking. Yet he
   undertook it with resolution, and he was carried through it. So if we
   undertake this work with the same good will and resolution, we shall
   undoubtedly be successful. However difficult it be, yet multitudes have
   gone through it, and have obtained salvation by the means. It is not a
   work beyond the faculties of our nature, nor beyond the opportunities
   which God giveth us. If men will but take warning, and hearken to
   counsel, if they will but be sincere and in good earnest, be seasonable
   in their work, take their opportunities, use their advantages be
   steadfast, and not wavering; they shall not fail.

  APPLICATION.

   The use I would make of this doctrine, is to exhort all to undertake
   and go through this great work, which they have to do in order to their
   salvation, and this let the work seem ever so great and difficult. If
   your nature be averse to it, and there seems to be very frightful
   things in the way, so that your heart is ready to fail at the prospect;
   yet seriously consider what has been said, and act a wise part. Seeing
   it is for yourselves, for your own salvation; seeing it is for so great
   a salvation, for your deliverance from eternal destruction; and seeing
   it is of such absolute necessity in order to your salvation, that the
   deluge of divine wrath will come, and there will be no escaping it
   without preparing an ark; is it not best for you to undertake the work,
   engage in it with your might, and go through it, though this cannot be
   done without great labor, care, and difficulty, and expense?
   I would by no means flatter you concerning this work, or go about to
   make you believe, that you shall find an easy light business of it: no,
   I would not have you expect any such thing. I would have you sit down
   and count the cost; and if you cannot find it in your hearts to engage
   in a great, hard, laborious, and expensive undertaking, and to
   persevere in it to the end of life, pretend not to be religious.
   Indulge yourselves in your ease; follow your pleasures; eat, drink, and
   be merry; even conclude to go to hell in that way, and never make any
   more pretenses of seeking your salvation. Here consider several things
   in particular.
   1. How often you have been warned of the approaching flood of God's
   wrath. How frequently you have been told of hell, heard the
   threatenings of the word of God set before you, and been warned to flee
   from the wrath to come. It is with you as it was with the inhabitants
   of the old world. Noah warned them abundantly of the approaching flood,
   and counseled them to take care for their safety, 1 Pet. 3:19, 20. Noah
   warned them in words; and he preached to them. He warned them also in
   his actions. His building the ark, which took him so long a time, and
   in which he employed so many hands, was a standing warning to them. All
   the blows of the hammer and axe, during the progress of that building,
   were so many calls and warnings to the old world, to take care for
   their preservation from the approaching destruction. Every knock of the
   workmen was a knock of Jesus Christ at the door of their hearts: but
   they would not hearken. All these warnings, though repeated every day,
   and continued for so long a time, availed nothing.

   Now, is it not much so with you, as it was with them? How often have
   you been warned! How have you heard the warning knocks of the gospel,
   Sabbath after Sabbath, for these many years! Yet how have some of you
   no more regarded them than the inhabitants of the old world regarded
   the noise of the workmen's tools in Noah's ark!

   Objection. But here possibly it may be objected by some, that though it
   be true they have often been told of hell, yet they never saw any thing
   of it, and therefore they cannot realize it that there is any such
   place. They have often heard of hell, and are told that wicked men,
   when they die, go to a most dreadful place of torment; that hereafter
   there will be a day of judgment, and that the world will be consumed by
   fire. But how do they know that it is really so? How do they know what
   becomes of those wicked men that die? None of them come back to tell
   them. They have nothing to depend on but the word which they hear. And
   how do they know that all is not a cunningly-devised fable?

   Answer. The sinners of the old world had the very same objection
   against what Noah told them of a flood about to drown the world. Yet
   the bare word of God proved to be sufficient evidence that such a thing
   was coming. What was the reason that none of the many millions then
   upon earth believed what Noah said, but this, that it was a strange
   thing, that no such thing had ever before been known? And what a
   strange story must that of Noah have appeared to them, wherein he told
   them of a deluge of waters above the tops of the mountains! Therefore
   it. is said, Heb. 11:7, that "Noah was warned of God of things not seen
   as yet." It is probable, none could conceive how it could be that the
   whole world should be drowned in a flood of waters; and all were ready
   to ask, where there was water enough for it; and by what means it
   should be brought upon the earth. Noah did not tell them how it should
   be brought to pass; he only told them that God had said that it should
   be: and that proved to be enough. The event showed their folly in not
   depending on the mere word of God, who was able, who knew how to bring
   it to pass, and who could not lie.

   In like manner the word of God will prove true, in threatening a flood
   of eternal wrath to overwhelm all the wicked. You will believe it when
   the event shall prove it, when it shall be too late to profit by the
   belief. The word of God will never fail; nothing is so sure as that:
   heaven and earth shall pass away, but the word of God shall not pass
   away. It is firmer than mountains of brass. At the end, the vision will
   speak and not lie. The decree shall bring forth, and all wicked men
   shall know that God is the Lord, that he is a God of truth, and that
   they are fools who will not depend on his word. The wicked of the old
   world counted Noah a fool for depending so much on the word of God, as
   to put himself to all the fatigue and expense of building the ark; but
   the event showed that they themselves were the fools, and that he was
   wise.

   2. Consider that the Spirit of God will not always strive with you; nor
   will his long suffering always wait upon you. So God said concerning
   the inhabitants of the old world, Gen. 4:3 "My Spirit shall not always
   strive with man, for that he also is flesh; yet his days shall be a
   hundred and twenty years." All this while God was striving with them.
   It was a day of grace with them, and God's long-suffering all this
   while waited upon them: 1 Peter 3:20, "Which sometime were disobedient,
   when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while
   the ark was a preparing." All this while they had an opportunity to
   escape, if they would but hearken and believe God. Even after the ark
   was finished, which seems to have been but little before the flood
   came, still there was an opportunity; the door of the ark stood open
   for some time. There was some time during which Noah was employed in
   laying up stores in the ark. Even then it was not too late; the door of
   the ark yet stood open.-About a week before the flood came, Noah was
   commanded to begin to gather in the beasts and birds. During this last
   week still the door of the ark stood open. But on the very day that the
   flood began to come, while the rain was yet withheld, Noah and his
   wife, his three sons, and their wives, went into the ark; and we are
   told, Gen. 7:16, that "God shut him in. Then the day of God's patience
   was past; the door of the ark was shut; God himself, who shuts and no
   man opens, shut the door. Then all hope of their escaping the flood was
   past; it was too late to repent that they had not hearkened to Noah's
   warnings, and had not entered into the ark while the door stood open.

   After Noah and his family had entered into the ark, and God had shut
   them in, after the windows of heaven were opened, and they saw how the
   waters were poured down out of heaven, we may suppose that many of
   those who were near came running to the door of the ark, knocking, and
   crying most piteously for entrance. But it was too late; God himself
   had shut the door, and Noah had no license, and probably no power, to
   open it. We may suppose, they stood knocking and calling, Open to us,
   open to us; O let us in; we beg that we may be let in. And probably
   some of them pleaded old acquaintance with Noah; that they had always
   been his neighbors, and had even helped him to build the ark. But all
   was in vain. There they stood till the waters of the flood came, and
   without mercy swept them away from the door of the ark.

   So it will be with you, if you continue to refuse to hearken to the
   warnings which are given you. Now God is striving with you; now he is
   warning you of the approaching flood, and calling upon you Sabbath
   after Sabbath. Now the door of the ark stands open. But God's Spirit
   will not always strive with you; his long-suffering will not always
   wait upon you. There is an appointed day of God's patience, which is as
   certainly limited as it was to the old world. God hath set your bounds,
   which you cannot pass. Though now warnings are continued in plenty, yet
   there will be last knocks and last calls, the last that ever you shall
   hear. When the appointed time shall be elapsed, God will shut the door,
   and you shall never see it open again; for God shutteth, and no man
   openeth.-If you improve not your opportunity before that time, you will
   cry in vain, "Lord, Lord, open to us," Matt. 25:11, and Luke 23:25, &c.
   While you shall stand at the door with your piteous cries, the flood of
   God's wrath will come upon you, overwhelm you, and you shall not
   escape. The tempest shall carry you away without mercy, and you shall
   be forever swallowed up and lost.

   3. Consider how mighty the billows of divine wrath will be when they
   shall come. The waters of Noah's flood were very great. The deluge was
   vast; it was very deep; the billows reached fifteen cubits above the
   highest mountains; and it was an ocean which had no shore; signifying
   the greatness of that wrath which is coming on wicked men in another
   world, which will be like a mighty flood of waters overwhelming them,
   and rising vastly high over their heads, with billows reaching to the
   very heavens. Those billows will be higher and heavier than mountains
   on their poor souls. The wrath of God will be an ocean without shores,
   as Noah's flood was: it will be misery that will have no end. The
   misery of the damned in hell can be better represented by nothing, than
   by a deluge of misery, a mighty deluge of wrath, which will be ten
   thousand times worse than a deluge of waters; for it will be a deluge
   of liquid fire, as in the Scriptures it is called a lake of fire and
   brimstone.-At the end of the world all the wicked shall be swallowed up
   in a vast deluge of fire, which shall be as great and as mighty as
   Noah's deluge of water. See 2 Pet. 3:5, 6, 7. After that the wicked
   will have mighty billows of fire and brimstone eternally rolling over
   their poor souls, and their miserable tormented bodies. Those billows
   may be called vast liquid mountains of fire and brimstone. And when one
   billow shall have gone over their heads, another shall follow, without
   intermission, giving them no rest day nor night to all eternity.

   4. This flood of wrath will probably come upon you suddenly, when you
   all think little of it, and it shall seem far from you. So the flood
   came upon the old world. See Matt. 24:36, &c. Probably many of them
   were surprised in the night by the waters bursting suddenly in at their
   doors, or under the foundations of their houses, coming in upon them in
   their beds. For when the fountains of the great deep were broken up,
   the waters, as observed before, burst forth in mighty torrents. To such
   a sudden surprise of the wicked of the old world in the night, probably
   that alludes in Job 27:20, "Terrors take hold on him as waters; a
   tempest stealeth him away in the night." So destruction is wont to come
   on wicked men, who hear many warnings of approaching destruction, and
   yet will not be influenced by them. For "he that is often reproved, and
   hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
   remedy," Prov. xxix. 1. And "when they shall say, Peace and safety;
   then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with
   child, and they shall not escape," 1 Thess. 5:3.

   5. If you will not hearken to the many warnings which are given you of
   approaching destruction, you will be guilty of more than brutish
   madness. The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib." They
   know upon whom they are dependent, and whom they must obey, and act
   accordingly. But you, so long as you neglect your own salvation, act as
   if you knew not God, your Creator and Proprietor, nor your dependence
   upon him. The very beasts, when they see signs of an approaching storm,
   will betake themselves to their dens for shelter. Yet you, when
   abundantly warned of the approaching storm of divine vengeance, will
   not fly to the hiding-place from the storm, and the covert from the
   tempest. The sparrow, the swallow, and other birds, when they are
   forewarned of approaching winter, will betake themselves to a safer
   climate. Yet you who have been often forewarned of the piercing blasts
   of divine wrath, will not, in order to escape them, enter into the New
   Jerusalem, of most mild and salubrious air, though the gate stands wide
   open to receive you. The very ants will be diligent in summer to lay up
   for winter: yet you will do nothing to lay up in store a good
   foundation against the time to come. Balaam's ass would not run upon a
   drawn sword, though his master, for the sake of gain, would expose
   himself to the sword of God's wrath; and so God made the dumb ass, both
   in words and actions, to rebuke the madness of the prophet, 1 Pet. ii.
   16. In like manner, you, although you have been oft warned that the
   sword of God's wrath is drawn against you, and will certainly be thrust
   through you, if you proceed in your present course, still proceed,
   regardless of the consequence.

   So God made the very beasts and birds of the old world to rebuke the
   madness of the men of that day: for they, even all sorts of them, fled
   to the ark while the door was yet open: which the men of that day
   refused to do; God hereby, thus signifying, that their folly was
   greater than that of the very brute creatures.-Such folly and madness
   are you guilty of; who refuse to hearken to the warnings that are given
   you of the approaching flood of the wrath of God.

   You have been once more warned to-day, while the door of the ark yet
   stands open. You have, as it were, once again heard the knocks of the
   hammer and axe in the building of the ark, to put you in mind that a
   flood is approaching. Take heed therefore that you do not still stop
   your ears, treat these warnings with a regardless heart, and still
   neglect the great work which you have to do lest the flood of wrath
   suddenly come upon you, sweep you away, and there be no remedy.
     __________________________________________________________________

Safety, Fulness, and Sweet Refreshment in Christ

    Isaiah 32:2 -- And a man shall be as an hiding-place from the wind, and a
    covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of
    a great rock in a weary land.
     __________________________________________________________________

   In these words we may observe,

   1. The person who is here prophesied of and commended, viz. the Lord
   Jesus Christ, the King spoken of in the preceding verse, who shall
   reign in righteousness. This King is abundantly prophesied of in the
   Old Testament, and especially in this prophecy of Isaiah. Glorious
   predictions were from time to time uttered by the prophets concerning
   that great King who was to come: there is no subject which is spoken of
   in so magnificent and exalted a style by the prophets of the Old
   Testament, as the Messiah. They saw his day and rejoiced, and searched
   diligently, together with the angels, into those things. I Peter 1:11,
   12. "Searching what, or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ which
   was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of
   Christ, and the glory that should follow. Unto whom it was revealed,
   that not unto themselves, but unto us, they did minister the things,
   which are now reported unto you by them that have preached the gospel
   unto you with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; which things the
   angels desire to look into."

   We are told here that "a man shall be a hiding-place from the wind,"
   &c. There is an emphasis in the words, that "a man" should be this. If
   these things had been said of God, it would not be strange under the
   Old Testament; for God is frequently called a hiding-place for his
   people, a refuge in time of trouble, a strong rock, and a high tower.
   But what is so remarkable is, that they are said of "a man." But this
   is a prophecy of the Son of God incarnate.

   2. The things here foretold of him, and the commendations given him.
   "He shall be a hiding-place from the wind, and a covert from the
   tempest:" that is, he shall be the safety and defence of his people, to
   which they shall flee for protection in the time of their danger and
   trouble. To him they shall flee, as one who is abroad, and sees a
   terrible storm arising, makes haste to some shelter to secure himself;
   so that however furious is the tempest, yet he is safe within, and the
   wind and rain, though they beat never so impetuously upon the roof and
   walls, are no annoyance unto him.

   He shall be as "rivers of water in a dry place." This is an allusion to
   the deserts of Arabia, which was an exceedingly hot and dry country.
   One may travel there many days, and see no sign of a river, brook, or
   spring, nothing but a dry and parched wilderness; so that travelers are
   ready to be consumed with thirst, as the children of Israel were when
   they were in this wilderness, when they were faint because there was no
   water. Now when a man finds Jesus Christ, he is like one that has been
   traveling in those deserts till he is almost consumed with thirst, and
   who as last finds a river of cool and clear water. And Christ was
   typified by the river of water that issued out of the rock for the
   children of Israel in this desert: he is compared to a river, because
   there is such a plenty and fulness in him.

   He is the "shadow of a great rock in a weary land." Allusion is still
   made to the desert of Arabia. It is not said, as the shadow of a tree,
   because in some places of that country, there is nothing but dry sand
   and rocks for a vast space together, not a tree to be seen; and the sun
   beats exceedingly hot upon the sands, and all the shade to be found
   there, where travellers can rest and shelter themselves from the
   scorching sun, is under some great rock. They who come to Christ find
   such rest and refreshment as the weary traveller in that hot and
   desolate country finds under the shadow of a great rock.

   We propose to speak to three propositions that are explicatory of the
   several parts of the text.

   I. There is in Christ Jesus abundant foundation of peace and safety for
   those who are in fear and danger. "A man shall be a hiding-place from
   the wind, a covert from the tempest."

   II. There is in Christ provision for the satisfaction, and full
   contentment, of the needy and thirsty soul. He shall be "as rivers of
   water in a dry place."

   III. There are quiet rest and sweet refreshment in Christ Jesus for him
   who is weary. He shall be "as the shadow of a great rock in a weary
   land."

   I. There is in Christ Jesus abundant foundation of peace and safety for
   those who are in fear and danger.

   The fears and dangers to which men are subject, are of two kinds;
   temporal and eternal. Men are frequently in distress from fear of
   temporal evils. We live in an evil world, where we are liable to an
   abundance of sorrows and calamities. A great part of our lives is spent
   in sorrowing for present or past evils, and in fearing those which are
   future. What poor, distressed creatures are we, when God is pleased to
   send his judgements among us! If he visits a place with mortal and
   prevailing sickness, what terror seizes our hearts! If any person is
   taken sick, and trembles for his life, or if our near friends are at
   the point of death, or in many other dangers, how fearful is our
   condition! Now there is sufficient foundation for peace and safety to
   those exercised with such fears, and brought into such dangers. But
   Christ is a refuge in all trouble; there is a foundation for rational
   support and peace in him, whatever threatens us. He, whose heart is
   fixed, trusting in Christ, need not be afraid of any evil tidings. "As
   the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so Christ is round about them
   that fear him."

   But it is the other kind of fear and danger to which we have a
   principal respect; the fear and danger of God's wrath. The fears of a
   terrified conscience, the fearful expectation of the dire fruits of
   sin, and the resentment of an angry God, these are infinitely the most
   dreadful. If men are in danger of those things, and are not asleep,
   they will be more terrified than with the fears of any outward evil.
   Men are in a most deplorable condition, as they are by nature exposed
   to God's wrath; and if they are sensible how dismal their case is, will
   be in dreadful fears and dismal expectations.

   God is pleased to make some sensible of their true condition. He lets
   them see the storm that threatens them, how black the clouds are, and
   how impregnated with thunder, that it is a burning tempest, that they
   are in danger of being speedily overtaken by it, that they have nothing
   to shelter themselves from it, and that they are in danger of being
   taken away by the fierceness of his anger.

   It is a fearful condition when one is smitten with a sense of the
   dreadfulness of God's wrath, when he has his heart impressed with the
   conviction that the great God is not reconciled to him, that he holds
   him guilty of these and those sins, and that he is angry enough with
   him to condemn him for ever. It is dreadful to lie down and rise up, it
   is dreadful to eat and drink, and to walk about, in God's anger from
   day to day. One, in such a case, is ready to be afraid of every thing;
   he is afraid of meeting God's wrath wherever he goes. He has no peace
   in his mind, but there is a dreadful sound in his ears; his mind is
   afflicted and tossed with tempest, and not comforted, and courage is
   ready to fail, and the spirit ready to sink with fear; for how can a
   poor worm bear the wrath of the great God, and what would not he give
   for peace of conscience, what would not he give if he could find
   safety! When such fears exist to a great degree, or are continued a
   long time, they greatly enfeeble the heart, and bring it to a trembling
   posture and disposition.

   Now for such as these there is abundant foundation for peace and safety
   in Jesus Christ, and this will appear from the following things:

   1. Christ has undertaken to save all such from what they fear, if they
   come to him. It is his professional business; the work in which he
   engaged before the foundation of the world. It is what he always had in
   his thoughts and intentions; he undertook from everlasting to be the
   refuge of those that are afraid of God's wrath. His wisdom is such,
   that he would never undertake a work for which he is not sufficient. If
   there were some in so dreadful a case that he was not able to defend
   them, or so guilty that it was not fit that he should save them, then
   he never would have undertaken for them. Those who are in trouble and
   distressing fear, if they come to Jesus Christ, have this to ease them
   of their fears, that Christ has promised them that he will protect
   them; that they come upon his invitation; that Christ has plighted his
   faith for their security if they will close with him; and that he is
   engaged by covenant to God the Father that he will save those afflicted
   and distressed souls that come to him.

   Christ, by his own free act, has made himself the surety of such, he
   has voluntarily put himself in their stead; and if justice has any
   thing against them, he has undertaken to answer for them. By his own
   act, he has engaged to be responsible for them; so that if they have
   exposed themselves to God's wrath, and to the stroke of justice, it is
   not their concern, but his, how to answer or satisfy for what they have
   done. Let there be never so much wrath that they have deserved, they
   are as safe as if they never had deserved any; because he has
   undertaken to stand for them, let it be more or less. If they are in
   Christ Jesus, the storm does of course light on him, and not on them;
   as when we are under a good shelter, the storm, that would otherwise
   come upon our heads, lights upon the shelter.

   2. He is chosen and appointed of the Father to this work. There needs
   to be no fear nor jealousy, whether the Father will approve of this
   undertaking of Christ Jesus, whether he will accept of him as a surety,
   or whether he will be willing that his wrath should be poured upon his
   own dear Son, instead of us miserable sinners. For there was an
   agreement with him concerning it before the world was; it was a thing
   much upon God's heart, that his Son Jesus Christ should undertake this
   work, and it was the Father that sent him into the world. It is as much
   the act of God the Father as it is of the Son. Therefore, when Christ
   was near the time of his death, he tells the Father that he had
   finished the work which he gave him to do. Christ is often called God's
   elect, or his chosen, because he was chosen by the Father for his work;
   and God's anointed, for the words Messiah and Christ signify anointed,
   because he is by God appointed and fitted for this work.

   3. If we are in Christ Jesus, justice and the law have its course with
   respect to our sins, without our hurt. The foundation of the sinner's
   fear and distress is the justice and the law of God; they are against
   him, and they are unalterable, they must have their course. Every jot
   and tittle of the law must be fulfilled, heaven and earth shall be
   destroyed, rather than justice should not take place; there is no
   possibility of sin's escaping justice.

   But yet if the distressed trembling soul who is afraid of justice,
   would fly to Christ, he would be a safe hiding-place. Justice and the
   threatening of the law will have their course as fully, while he is
   safe and untouched, as if he were to be eternally destroyed. Christ
   bears the stroke of justice, and the curse of the law falls fully upon
   him; Christ bears all that vengeance that belongs to the sin that has
   been committed by him, and there is no need of its being borne twice
   over. His temporal sufferings, by reason of the infinite dignity of his
   person, are fully equivalent to the eternal sufferings of a mere
   creature. And then his sufferings answer for him who flees to him as
   well as if they were his own, for indeed they are his own by virtue of
   the union between Christ and him. Christ has made himself one with
   them; he is the head, and they are the members. Therefore, if Christ
   suffers for the believer, there is no need of his suffering; and what
   needs he to be afraid? His safety is not only consistent with absolute
   justice, but it is consistent with the tenor of the law. The law leaves
   fair room for such a thing as the answering of a surety. If the end of
   punishment in maintaining the authority of the law and the majesty of
   the government is fully secured by the sufferings of Christ as his
   surety, then the law of God, according to the true and fair
   interpretation of it, has its course as much in the sufferings of
   Christ, as it would have in his own sufferings. The threatening, "thou
   shalt surely die," is properly fulfilled in the death of Christ, as it
   is fairly to be understood. Therefore if those who are afraid will go
   to Jesus Christ, they need to fear nothing from the threatening of the
   law. The threatening of the law has nothing to do with them.

   4. Those who come to Christ, need not be afraid of God's wrath for
   their sins; for God's honour will not suffer by their escaping
   punishment and being made happy. The wounded soul is sensible that he
   has affronted the majesty of God, and looks upon God as a vindicator of
   his honour; as a jealous God that will not be mocked, an infinitely
   great God that will not bear to be affronted, that will not suffer his
   authority and majesty to be trampled on, that will not bear that his
   kindness should be abused. A view of God in this light terrifies
   awakened souls. They think how exceedingly they have sinned, how they
   have sinned against light, against frequent and long-continued calls
   and warnings; and how they have slighted mercy, and been guilty of
   turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, taking encouragement from
   God's mercy to go on in sin against him; and they fear that God is so
   affronted at the contempt and slight which they have cast upon him,
   that he, being careful of his honour, will never forgive them, but will
   punish them. But if they go to Christ, the honour of God's majesty and
   authority will not be in the least hurt by their being freed and made
   happy. For what Christ has done has repaired God's honour to the full.
   It is a greater honour to God's authority and majesty, that, rather
   than it should be wronged, so glorious a person would suffer what the
   law required. It is surely a wonderful display of the honour of God's
   majesty, to see an infinite and eternal person dying for its being
   wronged. And then Christ by his obedience, by that obedience which he
   undertook for our sakes, has honoured God abundantly more than the sins
   of any of us have dishonoured him, how many soever, and how great
   soever. How great an honour is it to God's law that so great a person
   is willing to submit to it, and to obey it! God hates our sins, but not
   more than he delights in Christ's obedience which he performed on
   account. This is a sweet savour to him, a savour of rest. God is
   abundantly compensated, he desires no more; Christ's righteousness is
   of infinite worthiness and merit.

   5. Christ is a person so dear to the Father, that those who are in
   Christ need not be at all jealous of being accepted upon his account.
   If Christ is accepted they must of consequence be accepted, for they
   are in Christ, as members, as parts, as the same. They are the body of
   Christ, his flesh and his bones. They that are in Christ Jesus, are one
   spirit; and therefore, if God loves Christ Jesus, he must of necessity
   accept of those that are in him, and that are of him. But Christ is a
   person exceedingly dear to the Father, the Father's love to the Son is
   really infinite. God necessarily loves the Son; God could as soon cease
   to be, as cease to love the Son. He is God's elect, in whom his soul
   delighteth; he is his beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased; he loved
   him before the foundation of the world, and had infinite delight in him
   from all eternity.

   A terrified conscience, therefore, may have rest here, and abundant
   satisfaction that he is safe in Christ, and that there is not the least
   danger but that he shall be accepted, and that God will be at peace
   with him in Christ.

   6. God has given an open testimony that Christ has done and suffered
   enough, and that he is satisfied with it, by his raising him from the
   dead. Christ, when he was in his passion, was in the hands of justice,
   he was God's prisoner for believers, and it pleased God to bruise him,
   and put him to grief, and to bring him into a low state; and when he
   raised him from the dead, he set him at liberty, whereby he declared
   that it was enough. If God was not satisfied, why did he set Christ at
   liberty so soon? he was in the hands of justice, why did not God pour
   out more wrath upon him, and hold him in the chains of darkness longer?
   God raised him up and opened the prison doors to him, because he
   desired no more. And now surely there is free admittance for all
   sinners into God's favour through this risen Saviour, there is enough
   done, and God is satisfied; as he has declared and sealed to it by the
   resurrection of Christ, who is alive, and lives for evermore, and is
   making intercession for poor, distressed souls that come unto him.

   7. Christ has the dispensation of safety and deliverance in his own
   hands, so that we need not fear but that, if we are united to him, we
   may be safe. God has given him all power in heaven and in earth, to
   give eternal life to whomsoever comes to him. He is made head over all
   things to the church, and the work of salvation is left with himself,
   he may save whom he pleases, and defend those that are in him by his
   own power. What greater ground of confidence could God have given us
   than that the Mediator, who died for us, and intercedes for us, should
   have committed to him the dispensation of the very thing which he died
   to purchase and for which he intercedes?

   8. Christ's love, and compassion, and gracious disposition, are such
   that we may be sure he is inclined to receive all who come to him. If
   he should not do it, he would fail of his own undertaking, and also of
   his promise to the Father, and to us; and his wisdom and faithfulness
   will not allow of that. But he is so full of love and kindness that he
   is disposed to nothing but to receive and defend us, if we come to him.
   Christ is exceedingly ready to pity us, his arms are open to receive
   us, he delights to receive distressed souls that come to him, and to
   protect them; he would gather them as a hen gathereth her chickens
   under her wings; it is a work that he exceedingly rejoices in, because
   he delights in acts of love, and pity, and mercy.

   I shall take occasion from what now has been said, to invite those who
   are afraid of God's wrath, to come to Christ Jesus. You are indeed in a
   dreadful condition. It is dismal to have God's wrath impending over our
   heads, and not to know how soon it will fall upon us. And you are in
   some measure sensible that it is a dreadful condition, you are full of
   fear and trouble, and you know not where to flee for help; your mind
   is, as it were, tossed with a tempest. But how lamentable is it, that
   you should spend your life in such a condition, when Christ would
   shelter you, as a hen shelters her chickens under her wings, if you
   were but willing; and that you should live such a fearful, distressed
   life, when there is so much provision made for your safety in Christ
   Jesus!

   How happy would you be if your hearts were but persuaded to close with
   Jesus Christ! Then you would be out of all danger: whatever storms and
   tempests were without, you might rest securely within; you might hear
   the rushing of the wind, and the thunder roar abroad, while you are
   safe in this hiding-place. O be persuaded to hide yourself in Christ
   Jesus! What greater assurance of safety can you desire? He has
   undertaken to defend and save you, if you will come to him: he looks
   upon it as his work; he engaged in it before the world was, and he has
   given his faithful promise which he will not break; and if you will but
   make your flight there, his life shall be for yours; he will answer for
   you, you shall have nothing to do but rest quietly in him; you may
   stand still and see what the Lord will do for you. If there be any
   thing to suffer, the suffering is Christ's, you will have nothing to
   suffer; if there be any thing to be done, the doing of it is Christ's,
   you will have nothing to do but to stand still and behold it.

   You will certainly be accepted of the Father if your soul lays hold of
   Jesus Christ. Christ is chosen and anointed of the Father, and sent
   forth for this very end, to save those that are in danger and fear; and
   he is greatly beloved of God, even infinitely, and he will accept of
   those that are in him. Justice and the law will not be against you, if
   you are in Christ; that threatening, "in the day that thou eatest thou
   shalt die," in the proper sense of it, will not touch you. The majesty
   and honour of God are not against you. You need not be afraid but that
   you shall be justified, if you come to him; there is an act of
   justification already past and declared for all who come to Christ by
   the resurrection of Christ, and as soon as ever you come, you are by
   that declared free. If you come to Christ it will be a sure sign that
   Christ loved you from all eternity, and that he died for you; and you
   may be sure if he died for you, he will not lose the end of his death,
   for the dispensation of life is committed unto him.

   You need not, therefore, continue in so dangerous a condition; there is
   help for you. You need not stand out in the storm so long, as there is
   so good a shelter near you, whose doors are open to receive you. O make
   haste, therefore, unto that man who is a hiding-place from the wind,
   and a covert from the tempest!

   Let this truth also cause believers more to prize the Lord Jesus
   Christ. Consider that it is he, and he only, who defends you from
   wrath, and that he is a safe defence; your defence is a high tower;
   your city of refuge is impregnable. There is no rock like your rock.
   There is none like Christ, "the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the
   heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky; the eternal God
   is thy refuge, and underneath are everlasting arms." He in whom you
   trust is a buckler to all that trust in him. O prize that Saviour, who
   keeps your soul in safety, while thousands of others are carried away
   by the fury of God's anger, and are tossed with raging and burning
   tempests in hell! O, how much better is your case than theirs! and to
   whom is it owing but to the Lord Jesus Christ? Remember what was once
   your case, and what it is now, and prize Jesus Christ.

   And let those christians who are in doubts and fears concerning their
   condition, renewedly fly to Jesus Christ, who is a hiding-place from
   the wind, and a covert from the tempest. Most Christians are at times
   afraid whether they shall not miscarry at last. Such doubtings are
   always through some want of the exercise of faith, and the best remedy
   for them is a renewed resort of the soul to this hiding-place; the same
   act which at first gave comfort and peace, will give peace again. They
   that clearly see the sufficiency of Christ, and the safety of
   committing themselves to him to save them from what they fear, will
   rest in it that Christ will defend them; be directed therefore at such
   times to do as the psalmist. Psalm 56:3, 4. "What time I am afraid, I
   will trust in thee. In God I will praise his word; in God I have put my
   trust: I will not fear what flesh can do unto me."

   II. There is provision in Christ for the satisfaction and full
   contentment of the needy and thirsty soul.

   This is the sense of those words in the text, "as rivers of water in a
   dry place," in a dry and parched wilderness, where there is a great
   want of water, and where travellers are ready to be destroyed with
   thirst, such as was that wilderness in which the children of Israel
   wandered. This comparison is used elsewhere in the Scriptures. Psalm
   63:1. "O God, thou art my God; early will I seek thee: my soul
   thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty
   land, where no water is." Psalm 143:6. "I stretch forth my hands unto
   thee; my soul thirsteth after thee, as a thirsty land." Those who
   travel in such a land, who wander in such a wilderness, are in extreme
   need of water; they are ready to perish for the want of it; and thus
   they have a great thirst and longing for it.

   It is said that Christ is a river of water, because there is such a
   fulness in him, so plentiful a provision for the satisfaction of the
   needy and longing soul. When one is extremely thirsty, though it is not
   a small draught of water will satisfy him, yet when he comes to a
   river, he finds a fulness, there he may drink full draughts. Christ is
   like a river, in that he has a sufficiency not only for one thirsty
   soul, but by supplying him the fountain is not lessened; there is not
   the less afforded to those who come afterwards. A thirsty man does not
   sensibly lessen a river by quenching his thirst.
   Christ is like a river in another respect. A river is continually
   flowing, there are fresh supplies of water coming from the
   fountain-head continually, so that a man may live by it, and be
   supplied with water all his life. So Christ is an ever-flowing
   fountain; he is continually supplying his people, and the fountain is
   not spent. They who live upon Christ, may have fresh supplies from him
   to all eternity; they may have an increase of blessedness that is new,
   and new still, and which never will come to an end.

   In illustrating this second proposition, I shall inquire,

   1. What it is that the soul of every man naturally and necessarily
   craves.

   First. The soul of every man necessarily craves happiness. This is an
   universal appetite of human nature, that is alike in the good and the
   bad; it is as universal as the very essence of the soul, because it
   necessarily and immediately flows from that essence. It is not only
   natural to all mankind, but to the angels; it is universal among all
   reasonable, intelligent beings, in heaven, earth, or hell, because it
   flows necessarily from an intelligent nature. There is no rational
   being, nor can there be any, without a love and desire of happiness. It
   is impossible that there should be any creature made that should love
   misery, or not love happiness, since it implies a manifest
   contradiction; for the very notion of misery is to be in a state that
   nature abhors, and the notion of happiness, is to be in such a state as
   is most agreeable to nature.

   Therefore, this craving of happiness must be insuperable, and what
   never can be changed; it never can be overcome, or in any way abated.
   Young and old love happiness alike, and good and bad, wise and unwise;
   though there is a great variety as to men's ideas of happiness. Some
   think it is to be found in one thing, and some in another; yet, as to
   the desire of happiness in general, there is no variety. There are
   particular appetites that may be restrained, and kept under, and
   conquered, but this general appetite for happiness nev-er can be.

   Secondly. The soul of every man craves a happiness that is equal to the
   capacity of his nature. The soul of man is like a vessel; the capacity
   of the soul is as the largeness or contents of the vessel. And
   therefore, if man has much pleasure and happiness, yet if the vessel is
   not full, the craving will not cease. Every creature is restless till
   it enjoys what is equal to the capacity of its nature. Thus we may
   observe in the brutes; when they have that which is suitable to their
   nature, and proportional to their capacity, they are contented. Man is
   of such a nature, that he is capable of an exceedingly great degree of
   happiness; he is made of a vastly higher nature than the brutes, and
   therefore he must have vastly higher happiness to satisfy. The
   pleasures of the outward senses which content the beasts, will not
   content man. He has other faculties of a higher nature that stand in
   need of something to fill them; if the sense be satiated, yet if the
   faculties of the soul are not filled, man will be in a craving restless
   state.

   It is more especially by reason of the faculty of understanding that
   the soul is capable of so great a happiness, and desires so much. The
   understanding is an exceedingly extensive faculty; it extends itself
   beyond the limits of earth, beyond the limits of the creation. As we
   are capable of understanding immensely more than we do understand, who
   can tell how far the understanding of men is capable of stretching
   itself? and as the understanding enlarges, the desire will enlarge with
   it. It must therefore be an incomprehensible object that must satisfy
   the soul; it will never be contented with that, and that only, to which
   it can see an end, it will never be satisfied with that happiness to
   which it can find a bottom. A man may seem to take contentment for a
   little while in a finite object, but after he has had a little
   experience, he finds that he wants something besides. This is very
   apparent from the experience of this restless craving world. Every one
   is inquiring, Who will show us any good?

   2. Men in their fallen state, are in very great want of this happiness.
   They were once in the enjoyment of it, but mankind are sunk to a very
   low estate; we are naturally poor, destitute creatures. We came naked
   into the world, and our souls as well as our bodies are in a wretched,
   miserable condition; we are so far from having food to eat suitable to
   our nature, that we are greedy after the husks which the swine do eat.

   The poverty of man in a natural condition, appears in his discontented,
   craving spirit; it shows that the soul is very empty, when, like the
   horse-leech, it cries, "Give, give, and saith not, It is enough." We
   are naturally like the prodigal, for we once were rich, but we departed
   from our father's house, and have squandered away our wealth, and are
   become poor, hungry, famishing wretches. Men in a natural condition may
   find something to gratify their senses, but there is nothing to feed
   the soul; that more noble and more essential part perishes for lack of
   food. They may fare sumptuously every day, they may pamper their
   bodies, but the soul cannot be fed from a sumptuous table; they may
   drink wine in bowls, yet the spiritual part is not refreshed. The
   superior faculties want to be supplied as well as the inferior. True
   poverty and true misery consist in the want of those things of which
   our spiritual part stands in need.

   3. Those sinners who are thoroughly awakened, are sensible of their
   great want. Multitudes of men are not sensible of their miserable,
   needy condition. There are many who are thus poor, and think themselves
   rich, and increased in goods. Indeed there are no natural men that have
   true contentment: they are all restless, and crying, "Who will show us
   any good?" but multitudes are not sensible how exceedingly necessitous
   is their condition. But the thoroughly awakened soul sees that he is
   very far from true happiness, that those things which he possesses will
   never make him happy; that for all his outward possessions he is
   wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. He becomes
   sensible of the short continuance and uncertainty of those things, and
   their insufficiency to satisfy a troubled conscience. He wants
   something else to give him peace and ease. If you would tell him that
   he might have a kingdom, it would not quiet him; he desires to have his
   sins pardoned, and to be at peace with his Judge. He is poor, and he
   becomes as a beggar; he comes and cries for help. He does not thirst,
   because he as yet sees where true happiness is to be found, but because
   he sees that he has it not, and cannot find it. He is without comfort,
   and does not know where to find it, but he longs for it. O, what would
   he not give, if he could find some satisfying peace and comfort!

   Such are those hungry, thirsty souls that Christ so often invites to
   come to him. Isaiah 55:1, 2. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to
   the waters, and he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat; yea, come,
   buy wine and milk without money and without price. Wherefore do ye
   spend money for that which is not bread, and your labour for that which
   satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is
   good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness." "If any man thirst,
   let him come unto me and drink; and he that is athirst, let him come
   and take of the water of life freely."

   4. There is in Christ Jesus provision for the full satisfaction and
   contentment of such as these.

   First. The excellency of Christ is such, that the discovery of it is
   exceedingly contenting and satisfying to the soul. The inquiry of the
   soul is after that which is most excellent. The carnal soul imagines
   that earthly things are excellent; one thinks riches most excellent,
   another has the highest esteem of honour, and to another carnal
   pleasure appears the most excellent; but the soul cannot find
   contentment in any of these things, because it soon finds an end to
   their excellency. Worldly men imagine, that there is true excellency
   and true happiness in those things which they are pursuing. They think
   that if they could but obtain them, they should be happy; and when they
   obtain them, and cannot find happiness, they look for happiness in
   something else, and are still upon the pursuit.

   But Christ Jesus has true excellency, and so great excellency, that
   when they come to see it they look no further, but the mind rests
   there. It sees a transcendent glory and an ineffable sweetness in him;
   it sees that till now it has been pursuing shadows, but that now it has
   found the substance; that before it had been seeking happiness in the
   stream, but that now it has found the ocean. The excellency of Christ
   is an object adequate to the natural cravings of the soul, and is
   sufficient to fill the capacity. It is an infinite excellency, such an
   one as the mind desires, in which it can find no bounds; and the more
   the mind is used to it, the more excellent it appears. Every new
   discovery makes this beauty appear more ravishing, and the mind sees no
   end; here is room enough for the mind to go deeper and deeper, and
   never come to the bottom. The soul is exceedingly ravished when it
   first looks on this beauty, and it is never weary of it. The mind never
   has any satiety, but Christ's excellency is always fresh and new, and
   tends as much to delight, after it has been seen a thousand or ten
   thousand years, as when it was seen the first moment. The excellency of
   Christ is an object suited to the superior faculties of man, it is
   suited to entertain the faculty of reason and understanding, and there
   is nothing so worthy about which the understanding can be employed as
   this excellency; no other object is so great, noble, and exalted.

   This excellency of Jesus Christ is the suitable food of the rational
   soul. The soul that comes to Christ, feeds upon this, and lives upon
   it; it is that bread which came down from heaven, of which he that eats
   shall not die; it is angels' food, it is that wine and milk that is
   given without money, and without price. This is that fatness in which
   the believing soul delights itself; here the longing soul may be
   satisfied, and the hungry soul may be filled with goodness. The delight
   and contentment that is to be found here, passeth understanding, and is
   unspeakable and full of glory. It is impossible for those who have
   tasted of this fountain, and know the sweetness of it, ever to forsake
   it. The soul has found the river of water of life, and it desires no
   other drink; it has found the tree of life, and it desires no other
   fruit.

   Secondly. The manifestation of the love of Christ gives the soul
   abundant contentment. This love of Christ is exceedingly sweet and
   satisfying, it is better than life, because it is the love of a person
   of such dignity and excellency. The sweetness of his love depends very
   much upon the greatness of his excellency; so much the more lovely the
   person, so much the more desirable is his love. How sweet must the love
   of that person be, who is the eternal Son of God, who is of equal
   dignity with the Father! How great a happiness must it be to be the
   object of the love of him who is the Creator of the world, and by whom
   all things consist, and who is exalted at God's right hand, and made
   head over principalities and powers in heavenly places, who has all
   things put under his feet, and is King of kings and Lord of lords, and
   is the brightness of the Father's glory! Surely to be beloved by him,
   is enough to satisfy the soul of a worm of the dust.

   This love of Christ is also exceedingly sweet and satisfying from the
   greatness of it; it is a dying love; such love as never was before
   seen, and such as no other can parallel. There have been instances of
   very great love between one earthly friend and another; there was a
   surpassing love between David and Jonathan. But there never was any
   such love as Christ has towards believers. The satisfying nature of
   this love arises also from the sweet fruits of it. Those precious
   benefits that Christ bestows upon his people, and those precious
   promises which he has given them, are the fruit of this love; joy and
   hope are the constant streams that flow from this fountain, from the
   love of Christ.

   Thirdly. There is provision for the satisfaction and contentment of the
   thirsty longing soul in Christ, as he is the way to the Father; not
   only from the fulness of excellency and grace which he has in his own
   person, but as by him we may come to God, may be reconciled to him, and
   may be made happy in his favour and love. The poverty and want of the
   soul in its natural state consist in its being separated from God, for
   God is the riches and the happiness of the creature. But we naturally
   are alienated from God; and God is alienated from us, our Maker is not
   at peace with us. But in Christ there is a way for a free communication
   between God and us; for us to come to God, and for God to communicate
   himself to us by his Spirit. John 14:6. "Jesus saith unto him, I am the
   way, and the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father but by
   me." Ephesians 2:13, 18, 19. "But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes
   were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. For through him we
   both have access by one Spirit unto the Father. Now, therefore, ye are
   no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints,
   and of the household of God." Christ by being thus the way to the
   Father, is the way to true happiness and contentment. John 10:9. "I am
   the door: by me, if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go
   in and out, and find pasture." Hence I would take occasion to invite
   needy, thirsty souls to come to Jesus. "In the last day, that great day
   of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him
   come unto me and drink." You that have not yet come to Christ, are in a
   poor, necessitous condition; you are in a parched wilderness, in a dry
   and thirsty land. And if you are thoroughly awakened, you are sensible
   that you are in distress and ready to faint for want of something to
   satisfy your souls. Come to him who is "as rivers of water in a dry
   place." There are plenty and fulness in him; he is like a river that is
   always flowing, you may live by it for ever, and never be in want. Come
   to him who has such excellency as is sufficient to give full
   contentment to your soul, who is a person of transcendent glory, and
   ineffable beauty, where you may entertain the view of your soul for
   ever without weariness, and without being cloyed. Accept of the offered
   love of him who is the only-begotten Son of God, and his elect, in whom
   his soul delighteth. Through Christ, come to God the Father, from whom
   you have departed by sin. He is the way, the truth, and the life; he is
   the door, by which if any man enters he shall be saved.

   III. There are quiet rest and sweet refreshment in Christ Jesus, for
   those that are weary. He is "as the shadow of a great rock in a weary
   land."

   The comparison that is used in the text is very beautiful and very
   significative. The dry, barren, and scorched wilderness of Arabia is a
   very lively representation of the misery that men have brought upon
   themselves by sin. It is destitute of any inhabitants but lions and
   tigers and fiery serpents; it is barren and parched, and without any
   river or spring; it is a land of drought, wherein there is seldom any
   rain, a land exceedingly hot and uncomfortable. The scorching sunbeams
   that are ready to consume the spirits of travellers, are a fit
   representation of terror of conscience, and the inward sense of God's
   displeasure. And there being no other shade in which travellers may
   rest, but only here and there that of a great rock, it is a fit
   representation of Jesus Christ, who came to redeem us from our misery.
   Christ is often compared to a rock, because he is a sure foundation to
   builders, and because he is a sure bulwark and defence. They who dwell
   upon the top of a rock, dwell in a most defensible place; we read of
   those whose habitation is the munitions of rocks. He may also be
   compared to a rock, as he is everlasting and unchangeable. A great rock
   remains stedfast, unmoved, and unbroken by winds and storms from age to
   age; and therefore God chose a rock to be an emblem of Christ in the
   wilderness, when he caused water to issue forth for the children of
   Israel; and the shadow of a great rock is a most fit representation of
   the refreshment given to weary souls by Jesus Christ.

   1. There is quiet rest and full refreshment in Christ for sinners that
   are weary and heavy laden with sin. Sin is the most evil and odious
   thing, as well as the most mischievous and fatal; it is the most mortal
   poison; it, above all things, hazards life, and endangers the soul,
   exposes to the loss of all happiness, and to the suffering of all
   misery, and brings the wrath of God. All men have this dreadful evil
   hanging about them, and cleaving fast to the soul, and ruling over it,
   and keeping it in possession, and under absolute command: it hangs like
   a viper to the heart, or rather holds it as a lion does his prey.

   But yet there are multitudes, who are not sensible of their misery.
   They are in such a sleep that they are not very unquiet in this
   condition, it is not very burthensome to them, they are so sottish that
   they do not know what is their state, and what is like to become of
   them. But there are others who have their sense so far restored to them
   that they feel the pain, and see the approaching destruction, and sin
   lies like a heavy load upon their hearts; it is a load that lies upon
   them day and night, they cannot lay it down to rest themselves, but it
   continually oppresses them. It is bound fast unto them, and is ready to
   sink them down; it is a continual labour of heart, to support itself
   under this burden. Thus we read of them "that labour, and are heavy
   laden." Or rather, it is like the scorching heat in a dry wilderness,
   where the sun beats and burns all the day long; where they have nothing
   to defend them; where they can find no shade to refresh themselves. If
   they lay themselves down to rest, it is like lying down in the hot
   sands, where there is nothing to keep off the heat.

   Here it may be proper to inquire who are weary and heavy laden with
   sin; and in what sense a sinner may be weary and burdened with sin.
   Sinners are not wearied with sin from any dislike to it, or dislike of
   it. There is no sinner that is burdened with sin in the sense in which
   a godly man carries his indwelling sin, as his daily and greatest
   burden, because he loathes it, and longs to get rid of it; he would
   fain be at a great distance from it, and have nothing more to do with
   it; he is ready to cry out as Paul did, "O wretched man that I am! who
   shall deliver me from the body of this death?" The unregenerate man has
   nothing of this nature, for sin is yet his delight, he dearly loves it.
   If he be under convictions, his love to sin in general is not
   mortified, he loves it as well as ever, he hides it still as a sweet
   morsel under his tongue.
   But there is a difference between being weary and burdened with sin,
   and being weary of sin. Awakened sinners are weary with sin, but not
   properly weary of it.

   Therefore, they are only weary of the guilt of sin, the guilt that
   cleaves to their consciences is that great burden. God has put the
   sense of feeling into their consciences, that were before as seared
   flesh, and it is guilt that pains them. The filthiness of sin and its
   evil nature, as it is an offence to a holy, gracious, and glorious God,
   is not a burden to them. But it is the connexion between sin and
   punishment, between sin and God's wrath, that makes it a burden. Their
   consciences are heavy laden with guilt, which is an obligation to
   punishment; they see the threatening and curse of the law joined to
   their sins, and see that the justice of God and his vengeance are
   against them. They are burdened with their sins, not because there is
   any odiousness in them, but because there is hell in them. This is the
   sting of sin, whereby it stings the conscience, and distresses and
   wearies the soul.

   The guilt of such and such great sins is upon the soul, and the man
   sees no way to get rid of it, but he has wearisome days and wearisome
   nights; it makes him ready sometimes to say as the psalmist did, "O
   that I had wings like a dove! for then would I fly away and be at rest.
   Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness. I would
   hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest." But when sinners
   come to Christ, he takes away that which was their burden, or their sin
   and guilt, that which was so heavy upon their hearts, that so
   distressed their minds.

   First. He takes away the guilt of sin, from which the soul before saw
   no way how it was possible to be freed, and which, if it was not
   removed, led to eternal destruction. When the sinner comes to Christ,
   it is all at once taken away, and the soul is left free, it is
   lightened of its burden, it is delivered from its bondage, and is like
   a bird escaped from the snare of the fowler. The soul sees in Christ a
   way to peace with God, and a way by which the law may be answered, and
   justice satisfied, and yet he may escape; a wonderful way indeed, but
   yet a certain and a glorious one. And what rest does it give to the
   weary soul to see itself thus delivered, that the foundation of its
   anxieties and fears is wholly removed, and that God's wrath ceases,
   that it is brought into a state of peace with God, and that there is no
   more occasion to fear hell, but that it is for ever safe! How
   refreshing is it to the soul to be at once thus delivered of that which
   was so much its trouble and terror, and to be eased of that which was
   so much its burden! This is like coming to a cool shade after one has
   been travelling in a dry and hot wilderness, and almost fainting under
   the scorching heat. And then Christ also takes away sin itself, and
   mortifies that root of bitterness which is the cause of all the inward
   tumults and disquietudes that are in the mind, that make it like the
   troubled sea that cannot rest, and leaves it all calm. When guilt is
   taken away and sin is mortified, then the foundation of fear, and
   trouble, and pain is removed, and the soul is left in peace and
   serenity.

   Secondly. Christ puts strength and a principle of new life into the
   weary soul that comes to him. The sinner, before he comes to Christ, is
   as a sick man that is weakened and brought low, and whose nature is
   consumed by some strong distemper: he is full of pain, and so weak that
   he cannot walk nor stand. Therefore, Christ is compared to a physician.
   "But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole, need
   not a physician, but they that are sick." When he comes and speaks the
   word, he puts a principle of life into him that was before as dead: he
   gives a principle of spiritual life and the beginning of eternal life;
   he invigorates the mind with a communication of his own life and
   strength, and renews the nature and creates it again, and makes the man
   to be a new creature.

   So that the fainting, sinking spirits are now revived, and this
   principle of spiritual life is a continual spring of refreshment, like
   a well of living water. "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall
   give him, shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall
   be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life." Christ
   gives his Spirit, that calms the mind, and is like a refreshing breeze
   of wind. He gives that strength whereby he lifts up the hands that hang
   down, and strengthens the feeble knees.

   Thirdly. Christ gives to those who come to him such comfort and
   pleasure as are enough to make them forget all their former labour and
   travail. A little of true peace, a little of the joys of the manifested
   love of Christ, and a little of the true and holy hope of eternal life,
   are enough to compensate for all that toil and weariness, and to erase
   the remembrance of it from the mind. That peace which results from true
   faith passes understanding, and that joy is joy unspeakable. There is
   something peculiarly sweet and refreshing in this joy, that is not in
   other joys; and what can more effectually support the mind, or give a
   more rational ground of rejoicing, than a prospect of eternal glory in
   the enjoyment of God from God's own promise in Christ? If we come to
   Christ, we may not only be refreshed by resting in his shadow, but by
   eating his fruit: these things are the fruits of this tree. "I sat down
   under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my
   taste."
   Before proceeding to the next particular of this proposition, I would
   apply myself to those that are weary; to move them to repose themselves
   under Christ's shadow.

   The great trouble of such a state, one would think, should be a motive
   to you to accept of an offer of relief, and remedy. You are weary, and
   doubtless would be glad to be at rest; but here you are to consider,

   First. That there is no remedy but in Jesus Christ; there is nothing
   else will give you true quietness. If you could fly into heaven, you
   would not find it there; if you should take the wings of the morning,
   and dwell in the uttermost parts of the earth, in some solitary place
   in the wilderness, you could not fly from your burden. So that if you
   do not come to Christ, you must either continue still weary and
   burdened, or, which is worse, you must return to your old dead sleep,
   to a state of stupidity; and not only so, but you must be everlastingly
   wearied with God's wrath.

   Second. Consider that Christ is a remedy at hand. You need not wish for
   the wings of a dove that you may fly afar off, and be at rest, but
   Christ is nigh at hand, if you were but sensible of it. Romans 10:6, 7,
   8. "But the righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise, Say
   not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring
   Christ down from above:) or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is,
   to bring up Christ again from the dead.) But what saith it? The word is
   nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; that is, the word of
   faith which we preach." There is no need of doing any great work to
   come at this rest; the way is plain to it; it is but going to it, it is
   but sitting down under Christ's shadow. Christ requires no money to
   purchase rest of him, he calls to us to come freely, and for nothing.
   If we are poor and have no money, we may come. Christ sent out his
   servants to invite the poor, the maimed, the halt, and the blind.
   Christ does not want to be hired to accept of you, and to give you
   rest. It is his work as Mediator to give rest to the weary, it is the
   work that he was anointed for, and in which he delights. "The Spirit of
   the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach
   good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the
   broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of
   the prison to them that are bound."

   Third. Christ is not only a remedy for your weariness and trouble, but
   he will give you an abundance of the contrary, joy and delight. They
   who come to Christ, do no only come to a resting-place after they have
   been wandering in a wilderness, but they come to a banqueting-house
   where they may rest, and where they may feast. They may cease from
   their former troubles and toils, and they may enter upon a course of
   delights and spiritual joys.

   Christ not only delivers from fears of hell and of wrath, but he gives
   hopes of heaven, and the enjoyment of God's love. He delivers from
   inward tumults and inward pain from that guilt of conscience which is
   as a worm gnawing within, and he gives delight and inward glory. He
   brings us out of a wilderness of pits, and drought, and fiery flying
   spirits; and he brings us into a pleasant land, a land flowing with
   milk and honey. He delivers us out of prison, and lifts us off from the
   dunghill, and he sets us among princes, and causes us to inherit the
   throne of glory. Wherefore, if any one is weary, if any is in prison,
   if any one is in captivity, if any one is in the wilderness, let him
   come to the blessed Jesus, who is as the shadow of a great rock in a
   weary land. Delay not, arise and come away.

   2. There are quiet rest and sweet refreshment in Christ for God's
   people that are weary.

   The saints themselves, while they remain in this imperfect state, and
   have so much remains of sin in their hearts, are liable still to many
   troubles and sorrows, and much weariness, and have often need to resort
   anew unto Jesus Christ for rest. I shall mention three cases wherein
   Christ is a sufficient remedy.

   First. There is rest and sweet refreshment in Christ for those that are
   wearied with persecutions. It has been the lot of God's church in this
   world for the most part to be persecuted. It has had now and then some
   lucid intervals of peace and outward prosperity, but generally it has
   been otherwise. This has accorded with the first prophecy concerning
   Christ; "I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
   seed and her seed." Those two seeds have been at enmity ever since the
   time of Abel. Satan has borne great malice against the church of God,
   and so have those that are his seed. And oftentimes God's people have
   been persecuted to an extreme degree, have been put to the most
   exquisite torments that wit or art could devise, and thousands of them
   have been tormented to death.

   But even in such a case there are rest and refreshment to be found in
   Christ Jesus. When their cruel enemies have given them no rest in this
   world; when, as oftentimes has been the case, they could not flee, nor
   in any way avoid the rage of their adversaries, but many of them have
   been tormented gradually from day to day, that their torments might be
   lengthened; still rest has been found even then in Christ. It has been
   often found by experience; the martyrs have often showed plainly that
   the peace and calm of their minds were undisturbed in the midst of the
   greatest bodily torment, and have sometimes rejoiced and sung praises
   upon the rack and in the fire. If Christ is pleased to send forth his
   Spirit to manifest his love, and speaks friendly to the soul, it will
   support it even in the greatest outward torment that man can inflict.
   Christ is the joy of the soul, and if the soul be but rejoiced and
   filled with divine light, such joy no man can take away; whatever
   outward misery there be, the spirit will sustain it.

   Secondly. There is in Christ rest for God's people, when exercised with
   afflictions. If a person labour under great bodily weakness, or under
   some disease that causes frequent and strong pains, such things will
   tire out so feeble a creature as man. It may to such an one be a
   comfort and an effectual support to think, that he has a Mediator, who
   knows by experience what pain is; who by his pain has purchased eternal
   ease and pleasure for him; and who will make his brief sufferings to
   work out a far more exceeding delight, to be bestowed when he shall
   rest from his labours and sorrows.

   If a person be brought into great straits as to outward subsistence,
   and poverty brings abundance of difficulties and extremities; yet it
   may be a supporting, refreshing consideration to such an one to think,
   that he has a compassionate Savior, who when upon earth, was so poor
   that he had not where to lay his head, and who became poor to make him
   rich, and purchased for him durable riches, and will make his poverty
   work out an exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

   If God in his providence calls his people to mourn over lost relations,
   and if he repeats his stroke and takes away one after another of those
   that were dear to him; it is a supporting, refreshing consideration to
   think, that Christ has declared that he will be in stead of all
   relations unto those who trust in him. They are as his mother, and
   sister, and brother; he has taken them into a very near relation to
   himself: and in every other afflictive providence, it is a great
   comfort to a believing soul to think that he has an intercessor with
   God, that by him he can have access with confidence to the throne of
   grace, and that in Christ we have so many great and precious promises,
   that all things shall work together for good, and shall issue in
   eternal blessedness. God's people, whenever they are scorched by
   afflictions as by hot sun-beams, may resort to him, who is as a shadow
   of a great rock, and be effectually sheltered, and sweetly refreshed.

   Thirdly. There is in Christ quiet rest and sweet refreshment for God's
   people, when wearied with the buffetings of Satan. The devil, that
   malicious enemy of God and man, does whatever lies in his power to
   darken and hinder, and tempt God's people, and render their lives
   uncomfortable. Often he raises needless and groundless scruples, and
   casts in doubts, and fills the mind with such fear as is tormenting,
   and tends to hinder them exceedingly in the christian course; and he
   often raises mists and clouds of darkness, and stirs up corruption, and
   thereby fills the mind with concern and anguish, and sometimes wearies
   out the soul. So that they may say as the psalmist; "Many bulls have
   compassed me: strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round. They gaped
   upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring lion."

   In such a case if the soul flies to Jesus Christ, they may find rest in
   him, for he came into the world to destroy Satan, and to rescue souls
   out of his hands. And he has all things put under his feet, whether
   they be things in heaven, or things on earth, or things in hell, and
   therefore he can restrain Satan when he pleases. And that he is
   doubtless ready enough to pity us under such temptations, we may be
   assured, for he has been tempted and buffeted by Satan as well as we.
   He is able to succour those that are tempted, and he has promised that
   the will subdue Satan under his people's feet. Let God's people
   therefore, when they are exercised with any of those kinds of
   weariness, make their resort unto Jesus Christ for refuge and rest.

   REFLECTIONS

   1. We may here see great reason to admire the goodness and grace of God
   to us in our low estate, that he has so provided for our help and
   relief. We are by our own sin against God plunged into all sort of
   evil, and God has provided a remedy for us against every sort of evil,
   he has left us helpless in no calamity. We by our sin have exposed
   ourselves to wrath, to a vindictive justice; but God has done very
   great things that we might be saved from that wrath; he has been at
   infinite cost that the law might be answered without our suffering. We
   by our sins have exposed ourselves to terror of conscience, in
   expectation of the dreadful storm of God's wrath; but God has provided
   for us a hiding-place from the storm, he bids us enter into his
   chambers, and hide ourselves from indignation. We by sin have made
   ourselves poor, needy creatures; but God has provided for us gold tried
   in the fire. We by sin have made ourselves naked; and when he passed
   by, he took notice of our want, and has provided us white raiment that
   we may be clothed. We have made ourselves blind, and God in mercy to us
   has provided eye-salve, that we may see. We have deprived ourselves of
   all spiritual food; we are like the prodigal son that perished with
   hunger, and would gladly have filled his belly with husks. God has
   taken notice of this our condition, and has provided for us a feast of
   fat things, and has sent forth his servants to invite the poor, the
   maimed, the halt, and the blind. We by sin have brought ourselves into
   a dry and thirsty wilderness; but God was merciful, and took notice of
   our condition, and has provided for us rivers of water, water out of
   the rock. We by sin have brought upon ourselves a miserable slavery and
   bondage; God has made provision for our liberty. We have exposed
   ourselves to weariness; God has provided a resting-place for us. We by
   sin have exposed ourselves to many outward troubles and afflictions;
   God has pitied us, and in Christ has provided true comfort for us. We
   have exposed ourselves to our grand enemy, even Satan, to be tempted
   and buffeted by him; God has pitied, and has provided for us a Savior
   and Captain of salvation, who has overcome Satan, and is able to
   deliver us. Thus God has in Christ provided sufficiently for our help
   in all kinds of evils.

   How ought we to bless God for this abundant provision he has made for
   us, poor and sinful as we were, who were so undeserving and so
   ungrateful. He made no such provision for the fallen angels, who are
   left without remedy in all the woes and miseries into which they are
   plunged.

   2. We should admire the love of Christ to men, that he has thus given
   himself to be the remedy for all their evil, and a fountain of all
   good. Christ has given himself to us, to be all things to us that we
   need. We want clothing, and Christ does not only give us clothing, but
   he gives himself to be our clothing, that we might put him on.
   Galatians 3:27. "For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ
   have put on Christ." Romans 13:14. "But put ye on the Lord Jesus
   Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts
   thereof."

   We want food, and Christ has given himself to be our food; he has given
   his own flesh to be our meat, and his blood to be our drink, to nourish
   our soul. Thus Christ tells us that he is the bread which came down
   from heaven, and the bread of life. "I am that bread of life. Your
   fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead. This is the
   bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and
   not die. I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man
   eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; and the bread that I will
   give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world." In
   order to our eating of his flesh, it was necessary that he should be
   slain, as the sacrifices must be slain before they could be eaten; and
   such was Christ's love to us, that he consented to be slain, he went as
   a sheep to the slaughter, that he might give us his flesh to be food
   for our poor, famishing souls.

   We are in need of a habitation; we by sin have, as it were, turned
   ourselves out of house and home; Christ has given himself to be the
   habitation of his people. Psalm 90:1. "Lord, thou has been our
   dwelling-place in all generations." It is promised to God's people that
   they should dwell in the temple of God for ever, and should go no more
   out; and we are told that Christ is the temple of the new Jerusalem.

   Christ gives himself to his people to be all things to them that they
   need, and all things that make for their happiness. Colossians 3:11.
   "Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
   barbarian, Scythian, bond, nor free; but Christ is all, and in all."
   And that he might be so, he has refused nothing that is needful to
   prepare him to be so.

   When it was needful that he should be incarnate, he refused it not, but
   became man, and appeared in the form of a servant. When it was needful
   that he should be slain, he refused it not, but gave himself for us,
   and gave himself to us upon the cross.

   Here is love for us to admire, for us to praise, and for us to rejoice
   in, with joy that is full of glory for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

PARDON FOR THE GREATEST SINNERS

   Psalm 25:11 -- For thy name's sake, O Lord, pardon my iniquity; for it
   is great.
     __________________________________________________________________

   IT is evident by some passages in this psalm, that when it was penned,
   it was a time of affliction and danger with David. This appears
   particularly by the 15th and following verses: "Mine eyes are ever
   towards the Lord; for he shall pluck my feet out of the net," etc. His
   distress makes him think of his sins, and leads him to confess them,
   and to cry to God for pardon, as is suitable in a time of affliction.
   See ver. 7. "Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions;"
   and verse 18. "Look upon mine affliction, and my pain, and forgive all
   my sins."

   It is observable in the text, what arguments the psalmist makes use of
   in pleading for pardon.

   1. He pleads for pardon for God's name's sake. He has no expectation of
   pardon for the sake of any righteousness or worthiness of his for any
   good deeds he had done, or any compensation he had made for his sins;
   though if man's righteousness could be a just plea, David would have
   had as much to plead as most. But he begs that God would do it for his
   own name's sake, for his own glory, for the glory of his own free
   grace, and for the honour of his own covenant-faithfulness.

   2. The psalmist pleads the greatness of his sins as an argument for
   mercy. He not only doth not plead his own righteousness, or the
   smallness of his sins; he not only cloth not say, Pardon mine iniquity,
   for I have done much good to counterbalance it; or, Pardon mine
   iniquity, for it is small, and thou hast no great reason to be angry
   with me; mine iniquity is not so great, that thou hast any just cause
   to remember it against me; mine offence is not such but that thou
   mayest well enough overlook i': but on the contrary he says, Pardon
   mine iniquity, for it is great; he pleads the greatness of his sin, and
   not the smallness of it; the enforces his prayer with this
   consideration, that his sins are very heinous.

   But how could he make this a plea for pardon? I answer, Because the
   greater his iniquity was, the more need he had of pardon. It is as much
   as if he had said, Pardon mine iniquity, for it is so great that I
   cannot bear the punishment; my sin is so great that I am in necessity
   of pardon; my case will be exceedingly miserable, unless thou be
   pleased to pardon me. He makes use of the greatness of his sin, to
   enforce his plea for pardon, as a man would make use of the greatness
   of calamity in begging for relief. When a beggar begs for bread, he
   will plead the greatness of his poverty and necessity. When a man in
   distress cries for pity, what more suitable plea can be urged than the
   extremity of his case?--And God allows such a plea as this: for he is
   moved to mercy towards us by nothing in us but the miserableness of our
   case. He doth not pity sinners because they are worthy, but because
   they need his pity.

  DOCTRINE

   If we truly come to God for mercy, the greatness of our sin will be no
   impediment to pardon.--If it were an impediment, David would never have
   used it as a plea for pardon, as we find he does in the text.--The
   following things are needful in order that we truly come to God for
   mercy:

   I. That we should see our misery, and be sensible of our need of mercy.
   They who are not sensible of their misery cannot truly look to God for
   mercy; for it is the very notion of divine mercy, that it is the
   goodness and grace of God to the miserable. Without misery in the
   object, there can be no exercise of mercy. To suppose mercy without
   supposing misery, or pity without calamity, is a contradiction:
   therefore men cannot look upon themselves as proper objects of mercy,
   unless they first know themselves to be miserable; and so, unless this
   be the case, it is impossible that they should come to God for mercy.
   They must be sensible that they are the children of wrath; that the law
   is against them, and that they are exposed to the curse of it: that the
   wrath of God abideth on them; and that he is angry' with them every day
   while they are under the guilt of sin.--They must be sensible that it
   is a very dreadful thing to be the object of the wrath of God; that it
   is a very awful thing to have him for their enemy; and that they cannot
   bear his wrath. They must he sensible that the guilt of sin makes them
   miserable creatures, whatever temporal enjoyments they have; that they
   can be no other than miserable, undone creatures, so long as God is
   angry with them; that they are without strength, and must perish, and
   that eternally, unless God help them. They must see that their case is
   utterly desperate, for any thing that any one else can do for them;
   that they hang over the pit of eternal misery; and that they must
   necessarily drop into it, if God have not mercy on them.

   II. They must be sensible that they are not worthy that God should have
   mercy on them. They who truly come to God for mercy, come as beggars,
   and not as creditors: they come for mere mercy. for sovereign grace,
   and not for any thing that is due. Therefore, they must see that the
   misery under which they lie is justly brought upon them, and that the
   wrath to which they are exposed is justly threatened against them; and
   that they have deserved that God should be their enemy, and should
   continue to be their enemy. They must be sensible that it would be just
   with God to do as he hath threatened in his holy law, viz. make them
   the objects of his wrath and curse in hell to all eternity.-- They who
   come to God for mercy in a right manner are not disposed to find fault
   with his severity; but they come in a sense of their own utter
   unworthiness, as with ropes about their necks, and lying in the dust at
   the foot of mercy.

   III. They must come to God for mercy in and through Jesus Christ alone.
   All their hope of mercy must be from the consideration of what he is,
   what he hath done, and what he hath suffered; and that there is no
   other name given under heaven, among men, whereby we can be saved, but
   that of Christ; that he is the Son of God, and the Saviour of the
   world; that his blood cleanses from all sin, and that he is so worthy,
   that all sinners who are in him may well be pardoned and accepted.--It
   is impossible that any should come to God for mercy, and at the same
   time have no hope of mercy. Their coming to God for it, implies that
   they have some hope of obtaining, otherwise they would not think it
   worth the while to come. But they that come in a right manner have all
   their hope through Christ, or from the consideration of his redemption,
   and the sufficiency of it.--If persons thus come to God for mercy, the
   greatness of their sins will be no impediment to pardon. Let their sins
   be ever so many, and great, and aggravated, it will not make God in the
   least degree more backward to pardon them. This may be made evident by
   the following considerations:

   1. The mercy of God is as sufficient for the pardon of the greatest
   sins, as for the least; and that because his mercy is infinite. That
   which is infinite, is as much above what is great, as it is above what
   is small. Thus God being infinitely great, he is as much above kings as
   he is above beggars; he is as much above the highest angel, as he is
   above the meanest worm. One finite measure doth not come any nearer to
   the extent of what is infinite than another.--So the mercy of God being
   infinite, it must be as sufficient for the pardon of all sin, as of
   one. If one of the least sins be not beyond the mercy of God, so
   neither are the greatest, or ten thousand of them.--However, it must be
   acknowledged, that this alone doth not prove the doctrine. For though
   the mercy of God may be as sufficient for the pardon of great sins as
   others; yet there may be other obstacles, besides the want of mercy.
   The mercy of God may be sufficient, and yet the other attributes may
   oppose the dispensation of mercy in these cases.-- Therefore I observe,

   2. That the satisfaction of Christ is as sufficient for the removal of
   the greatest guilt, as the least: 1 John i. 7. " The blood of Christ
   cleanseth from all sin." Acts xiii. 39. " By him all that believe are
   justified from all things from which ye could not be justified by the
   law of Moses." All the sins of those who truly come to God for mercy,
   let them be what they will, are satisfied for, if God be true who tells
   us so; and if they be satisfied for, surely it is not incredible, that
   God should be ready to pardon them. So that Christ having fully
   satisfied for all sin, or having wrought out a satisfaction that is
   sufficient for all, it is now no way inconsistent with the glory of the
   divine attributes to pardon the greatest sins of those who in a right
   manner come unto him for it. God may now pardon the greatest sinners
   without any prejudice to the honour of his holiness. The holiness of
   God will not suffer him to give the least countenance to sin, but
   inclines him to give proper testimonies of his hatred of it. But Christ
   having satisfied for sin, God can now love the sinner, and give no
   countenance at all to sin, however great a sinner he may have been. It
   was a sufficient testimony of God's abhorrence of sin, that he poured
   out his wrath on his own dear Son, when he took the guilt of it upon
   himself. Nothing can more show God's abhorrence of sin than this. If
   all mankind had been eternally damned, it would not have been so great
   a testimony of it.

   God may, through Christ, pardon the greatest sinner without any
   prejudice to the honour of his majesty. The honour of the divine
   majesty indeed requires satisfaction; but the sufferings of Christ
   fully repair the injury. Let the contempt be ever so great, yet if so
   honourable a person as Christ undertakes to be a Mediator for the
   offender, and suffers so much for him, it fully repairs the injury done
   to the Majesty of heaven and earth. The sufferings of Christ fully
   satisfy justice. The justice of God, as the supreme Govemor and Judge
   of the world, requires the punishment of sin. The supreme Judge must
   judge the world according to a rule of justice. God doth not show mercy
   as a judge, but as a sovereign; therefore his exercise of mercy as a
   sovereign, and his justice as a judge, must be made consistent one with
   another; and this is done by the sufferings of Christ, in which sin is
   punished fully, and justice answered. Rom. iii. 25, 26. " Whom God hath
   set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare
   his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
   forbearance of God; to declare, I say, at this time, his righteousness;
   that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in
   Jesus."--The law is no impediment in the way of the pardon of the
   greatest sin, if men do but truly come to God for mercy: for Christ
   hath fulfilled the law, he hath borne the curse of it, in his
   sufferings; Gal. iii. 13. " Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of
   the law, being made a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every
   one that hangeth on a tree."

   3. Christ will no! refuse to save the greatest sinners, who in a right
   manner come to God for mercy; for this is his work. It is his business
   to be a Saviour of sinners; it is the work upon which he came into the
   world; and therefore he will not object to it. He did not come to call
   the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Matt. ix. 13. Sin is the very
   evil which he came into the world to remedy: therefore he will not
   object to any man that he is very sinful. The more sinful he is, the
   more need of Christ.--The sinfulness of man was the reason of Christ's
   coming into the world; this is the very misery from which he came to
   deliver men. The more they have of it, the more need they have of being
   delivered; " They that are whole need not a physician, but they that
   are sick," Matt. ix. 12. The physician will not make it an objection
   against healing a man who applies to him, that he stands in great need
   of his help. If a physician of compassion comes among the sick and
   wounded, surely he will not refuse to heal those that stand in most
   need of healing, if he be able to heal them.

   4. Herein cloth the glory of grace by the redemption of Christ much
   consist, viz. in its sufficiency for the pardon of the greatest
   sinners. The whole contrivance of the way of salvation is for this end,
   to glorify the free grace of God. God had it on his heart from all
   eternity to glorify this attribute; and therefore it is, that the
   device of saving sinners by Christ was conceived. The greatness of
   divine grace appears very much in this, that God by Christ saves the
   greatest offenders. The greater the guilt of any sinner is, the more
   glorious and wonderful is the grace manifested in his pardon: Rom.
   4:20. " Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound." The apostle,
   when telling how great a sinner he had been, takes notice of the
   abounding of grace in his pardon, of which his great guilt was the
   occasion: 1 Tim. i. 13. " Who was before a blasphemer, and a
   persecutor, and injurious. But I obtained mercy; and the grace of our
   Lord was exceeding abundant, with faith and love which is in Christ
   Jesus." The Redeemer is glorified, in that he proves sufficient to
   redeem those who are exceeding sinful, in that his blood proves
   sufficient to wash away the greatest guilt, in that he is able to save
   men to the uttermost, and in that he redeems even from the greatest
   misery. It is the honour of Christ to save the greatest sinners, when
   they come to him, as it is the honour of a physician that he cures the
   most desperate diseases or wounds. Therefore, no doubt, Christ will be
   willing to save the greatest sinners, if they come to him; for he will
   not be backward to glorify himself, and to commend the value and virtue
   of his own blood. Seeing he hath so laid out himself to redeem sinners,
   he will not be unwilling to show, that he is able to redeem to the
   uttermost.

   5. Pardon is as much offered and promised to the greatest sinners as
   any, if they will come aright to God for mercy. The invitations of the
   gospel are always in universal terms: as, Ho, every one that thirsteth;
   Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden; and, Whosoever
   will, let him come. And the voice of Wisdom is to men in general: Prov.
   viii. 4. " Unto you, O men, I call, and my voice is to the sons of
   men." Not to moral men, or religious men, but to you, O men. So Christ
   promises, John vi. 37. " Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast
   out." This is the direction of Christ to his apostles, after his
   resurrection, Mark xvi. 15, 16. " Go ye into all the world, and preach
   the gospel to every creature: he that believeth, and is baptized, shall
   be saved." Which is agreeable to what the apostle saith, that "the
   gospel was preached to every creature which is under heaven," Col. i.
   23.

   APPLICATION

   The proper use of this subject is, to encourage sinners whose
   consciences are burdened with a sense of guilt, immediately to go to
   God through Christ for mercy. If you go in the manner we have
   described, the arms of mercy are open to embrace you. You need not be
   at all the more fearful of coming because of your sins, let them be
   ever so black. If you had as much guilt lying on each of your souls as
   all the wicked men in the world, and all the damned souls in hell; yet
   if you come to God for mercy, sensible of your own vileness, and
   seeking pardon only through the free mercy of God in Christ, you would
   not need to be afraid; the greatness of your sins would be no
   impediment to your pardon. Therefore, if your souls be burdened, and
   you are distressed for fear of hell, you need not bear that burden and
   distress any longer. If you are but willing, you may freely come and
   unload yourselves, and cast all your burdens on Christ, and rest in
   him.

   But here I shall speak to some OBJECTIONS which some awakened sinners
   may be ready to make against what I now exhort them to.

   I. Some may be ready to object, I have spent my youth and all the best
   of my life in sin, and I am afraid God will not accept of me, when I
   offer him only mine old age.--To this I would answer, 1. Hath God said
   any where, that he will not accept of old sinners who come to him? God
   hath often made offers and promises in universal terms; and is there
   any such exception put in? Doth Christ say, All that thirst, let them
   come to me and drink, except old sinners? Come to me, all ye that
   labour and are heavy laden, except old sinners, and I will give you
   rest? Him that cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out, if he be not
   an old sinner? Did you ever read any such exception any where in the
   Bible? and why should you give way to exceptions which you make out of
   your own heads, or rather which the devil puts into your heads, and
   which have no foundation in the word of God?--Indeed it is more rare
   that old sinners are willing to come, than others; but if they do come,
   they are as readily accepted as any whatever.

   2. When God accepts of young persons, it is not for the sake of the
   service which they are like to do him afterwards, or because youth is
   better worth accepting than old age. You seem entirely to mistake the
   matter, in thinking that God will not accept of you because you are
   old; as though he readily accepted of persons in their youth, because
   their youth is better worth his acceptance; whereas it is only for the
   sake of Jesus Christ, that God is willing to accept of any.

   You say, your life is almost spent, and you are afraid that the best
   time for serving God is past; and that therefore God will not now
   accept of you; as if it were for the sake of the service which persons
   are like to do him, after they are converted, that he accepts of them.
   But a self-righteous spirit is at the bottom of such objections. Men
   cannot get off from the notion, that it is for some goodness or service
   of their own, either done or expected to be done, that God accepts of
   persons, and receives them into favour.--Indeed they who deny God their
   youth, the best part of their lives, and spend it in the service of
   Satan, dreadfully sin and provoke God; and he very often leaves them to
   hardness of heart when they are grown old. But if they are willing to
   accept of Christ when old, he is as ready to receive them as any
   others; for in that matter God hath respect only to Christ and his
   worthiness.

   II. But, says one, I fear I have committed sins that are peculiar to
   reprobates. I have sinned against light, and strong convictions of
   conscience; I have sinned presumptuously; and have so resisted the
   strivings of the Spirit of God, that I am afraid I have committed such
   sins as none of God's elect ever commit. I cannot think that God will
   ever leave one whom he intends to save, to go on and commit sins
   against so much light and conviction, and with such horrid
   presumption.--Others may say, I have had risings of heart against God;
   blasphemous thoughts, a spiteful and malicious spirit; and have abused
   mercy and the strivings of the Spirit, trampled upon the Saviour, and
   my sins are such as are peculiar to those who are reprobated to eternal
   damnation. To all this I would answer,

   1. There is no sin peculiar to reprobates but the sin against the Holy
   Ghost. Do you read of any other in the word of God? And if you do not
   read of any there, what ground have you to think any such thing? What
   other rule have we, by which to judge of such matters, but the divine
   word? If we venture to go beyond that, we shall be miserably in the
   dark. When we pretend to go further in our determinations than the word
   of God, Satan takes us up, and leads us. It seems to you that such sins
   are peculiar to the reprobate, and such as God never forgives. But what
   reason can you give for it, if you have no word of God to reveal it? Is
   it because you cannot see how the mercy of God is sufficient to pardon,
   or the blood of Christ to cleanse from such presumptuous sins? If so,
   it is because you never yet saw how great the mercy of God is; you
   never saw the sufficiency of the blood of Christ, and you know not how
   far the virtue of it extends. Some elect persons have been guilty of
   all manner of sins, except the sin against the Holy Ghost; and unless
   you have been guilty of this, you have not been guilty of any that are
   peculiar to reprobates.

   2. Men may be less likely to believe, for sins which they have
   committed, and not the less readily pardoned when they do believe. It
   must be acknowledged that some sinners are in more danger of hell than
   others. Though all are in great danger, some are less likely to be
   saved. Some are less likely ever to be converted and to come to Christ:
   but all who do come to him are alike readily accepted; and there is as
   much encouragement for one man to come to Christ as another.--Such sins
   as you mention are indeed exceeding heinous and provoking to God, and
   do in an especial manner bring the soul into danger of damnation, and
   into danger of being given to final hardness of heart; and God more
   commonly gives men up to the judgment of final hardness for such sins,
   than for others. Yet they are not peculiar to reprobates; there is but
   one sin that is so, viz. that against the Holy Ghost. And
   notwithstanding the sins which you have committed, if you can find it
   in your hearts to come to Christ, and close with him, you will be
   accepted not at all the less readily because you have committed such
   sins.--Though God cloth more rarely cause some sorts of sinners to come
   to Christ than others, it is not because his mercy or the redemption of
   Christ is not as sufficient for them as others, but because in wisdom
   he sees fit so to dispense his grace, for a restraint upon the
   wickedness of men; and because it is his will to give converting grace
   in the use of means, among which this is one, viz. to lead a moral and
   religious life, and agreeable to our light, and the convictions of our
   consciences. But when once any sinner is willing to come to Christ,
   mercy is as ready for him as for any. There is no consideration at all
   had of his sins; let him have been ever so sinful, his sins are not
   remembered; God doth not upbraid him with them.

   III. But had I not better stay till I shall have made myself better,
   before I presume to come to Christ. I have been, and see myself to be
   very wicked now; but am in hopes of mending myself, and rendering
   myself at least not so wicked: then I shall have more courage to come
   to God for mercy.--In answer to this,

   1. Consider how unreasonably you act. You are striving to set up
   yourselves for your own saviours; you are striving to get something of
   your own, on the account of which you may the more readily be accepted.
   So that by this it appears that you do not seek to be accepted only on
   Christ's account. And is not this to rob Christ of the glory of being
   your only Saviour? Yet this is the way in which you are hoping to make
   Christ willing to save you.

   2. You can never come to Christ at all, unless you first see that he
   will not accept of you the more readily for any thing that you can do.
   You must first see, that it is utterly in vain for you to try to make
   yourselves better on any such account. You must see that you can never
   make yourselves any more worthy, or less unworthy, by any thing which
   you can perform.

   3. If ever you truly come to Christ, you must see that there is enough
   in him for your pardon, though you be no better than you are. If you
   see not the sufficiency of Christ to pardon you, without any
   righteousness of your own to recommend you, you never will come so as
   to be accepted of him. The way to be accepted is to come--not on any
   such encouragement, that now you have made yourselves better, and more
   worthy, or not so unworthy, but--on the mere encouragement of Christ's
   worthiness, and God's mercy.

   4. If ever you truly come to Christ, you must come to him to make you
   better. You must come as a patient comes to his physician, with his
   diseases or wounds to be cured. Spread all your wickedness before him,
   and do not plead your goodness; but plead your badness, and your
   necessity on that account: and say, as the psalmist in the text, not
   Pardon mine iniquity, for it is not so great as it was, but, " Pardon
   mine iniquity, for it is Great."
     __________________________________________________________________

PRESSING INTO THE KINGDOM OF GOD

    Luke 16:16 -- The law and the prophets were until John; since that time the
    kingdom of God is preached, and every man presseth into it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   In these words two things may be observed: First, Wherein the work and
   office of John the Baptist consisted, viz. in preaching the kingdom of
   God, to prepare the way for its introduction to succeed the law and the
   prophets. By the law and the prophets, in the text, seems to be
   intended the ancient dispensation under the Old Testament, which was
   received from Moses and the prophets. These are said to be until John;
   not that the revelations given by them are out of use since that time,
   but that the state of the church, founded and regulated under God by
   them, the dispensation of which they were the ministers, and wherein
   the church depended mainly on light received from them, fully continued
   till John. He first began to introduce the New Testament dispensation,
   or gospel-state of the church; which, with its glorious, spiritual, and
   eternal privileges and blessings, is often called the kingdom of
   heaven, or kingdom of God. John the Baptist preached, that the kingdom
   of God was at hand. "Repent" says he, "for the kingdom of heaven is at
   hand:"-"Since that time," says Christ, "the kingdom of God is
   preached." John the Baptist first began to preach it; and then, after
   him, Christ and his disciples preached the same.

   Thus Christ preached, Matthew 4:17. "From that time Jesus began to
   preach, and to say, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." So
   the disciples were directed to preach, Matthew 10:7. "And, as ye go,
   preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand." It was not John the
   Baptist, but Christ, that fully brought in, and actually established,
   this kingdom of God; but he, as Christ's forerunner to prepare his way
   before him, did the first thing that was done towards introducing it.
   The old dispensation was abolished, and the new brought in by degrees;
   as the night gradually ceases, and gives place to the increasing day
   which succeeds in its room.

   First the day-star arises; next follows the light of the sun itself,
   but dimly reflected, in the dawning of the day; but this light
   increases, and shines more and more, and the stars that served for
   light during the foregoing night, gradually go out, and their light
   ceases, as being now needless, till at length the sun rises, and
   enlightens the world by his own direct light, which increases as he
   ascends higher above the horizon, till the day-star itself gradually
   disappears; agreeable to what John says of himself, John 3:30. "He must
   increase, but I must decrease." John was the forerunner of Christ, and
   harbinger of the gospel-day; much as the morning-star is the forerunner
   of the sun. He had the most honorable office of any of the prophets;
   the other prophets foretold Christ to come, he revealed him as already
   come, and had the honour to be that servant who should come immediately
   before him, and actually introduce him, and even to be the instrument
   concerned in his solemn inauguration, as he was in baptizing him. He
   was the greatest of the prophets that came before Christ, as the
   morning-star is the brightest of all the stars, Matthew 11:11. He came
   to prepare men's hearts to receive that kingdom of God which Christ was
   about more fully to reveal and erect. Luke 1:17. "To make ready a
   people prepared for the Lord."

   Secondly, We may observe wherein his success appeared, viz. in that
   since he began his ministry, every man pressed into that kingdom of God
   which he preached. The greatness of his success appeared in two things:

   1. In the generalness of it, with regard to the subject, or the persons
   in whom the success appeared; every man. Here is a term of
   universality; but it is not to be taken as universal with regard to
   individuals, but kinds; as such universal terms are often used in
   Scripture. When John preached, there was an extraordinary pouring out
   of the Spirit of God that attended his preaching. An uncommon
   awakening, and concern for salvation, appeared on the minds of all
   sorts of persons; and even in the most unlikely persons, and those from
   whom such a thing might least be expected; as the Pharisees, who were
   exceeding proud, and self-sufficient, and conceited of their own wisdom
   and righteousness, and looked on themselves fit to be teachers of
   others, and used to scorn to be taught; and the Sadducees, who were a
   kind of infidels, that denied any resurrection, angel, spirit, or any
   future state. So that John himself seems to be surprised to see them
   come to him, under such concern for their salvation; as in Matthew 3:7.
   "But when he saw many of the Pharisees come to his baptism, he said to
   them, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the
   wrath to come?" And besides these, the publicans, who were some of the
   most infamous sort of men, came to him, inquiring what they should do
   to be saved. And the soldiers, who were doubtless a very profane,
   loose, and prolifigate sort of persons, made the same inquiry, Luke
   3:12, and 14. "Then came also publicans to be baptized, and said unto
   him, Master, what shall we do? And the soldiers likewise demanded of
   him, saying, And what shall we do?

   2. His success appeared in the manner in which his hearers sought the
   kingdom of God; they pressed into it. It is elsewhere set forth by
   their being violent for the kingdom of heaven, and taking it by force.
   Matthew 11:12. "From the days of John the Baptist until now, the
   kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force."

   The Doctrine that I observe from the words is this,- "It concerns every
   one that would obtain the kingdom of God, to be pressing into it." -In
   discoursing of this subject, I would,

   First, Show what is that way of seeking salvation that seems to be
   pointed forth in the expression of pressing into the kingdom of God.

   Secondly, Give the reasons why it concerns every one that would obtain
   the kingdom of God, to seek it in this way.- And then make application.

   I. I would show what manner of seeking salvation seems to be denoted by
   "pressing into the kingdom of God."

   1. This expression denotes strength of desire. Men in general who live
   under the light of the gospel, and are not atheists, desire the kingdom
   of God; that is, they desire to go to heaven rather than to hell. Most
   of them indeed are not much concerned about it; but on the contrary,
   live a secure and careless life. And some who are many degrees above
   these, being under some degrees of the awakenings of God's Spirit, yet
   are not pressing into the kingdom of God. But they that may be said to
   be truly so, have strong desires to get out of a natural condition, and
   to get an interest in Christ. They have such a conviction of the misery
   of their present state, and of the extreme necessity of obtaining a
   better, that their minds are as it were possessed with and wrapped up
   in concern about it.

   To obtain salvation is desired by them above all things in the world.
   This concern is so great that it very much shuts out other concerns.
   They used before to have the stream of their desires after other
   things, or, it may be, had their concern divided between this and them;
   but when they come to answer the expression of the text, of pressing
   into the kingdom of God, this concern prevails above all others; it
   lays other things low, and does in a manner engross the care of the
   mind. This seeking eternal life should not only be one concern that our
   souls are taken up about with other things; but salvation should be
   sought as the one thing needful, Luke 10:42. And as the one thing that
   is desired, Psalm 27:4.

   2. Pressing into the kingdom of heaven denotes earnestness and firmness
   of resolution. There should be strength of resolution, accompanying
   strength of desire, as it was in the psalmist, in the place just now
   referred to: "one thing have I desired, and that will I seek after." In
   order to a thorough engagedness of the mind in this affair, both these
   must meet together. Besides desires after salvation, there should be an
   earnest resolution in persons to pursue this good as much as lies in
   their power; to do all that in the use of their utmost strength they
   are able to do, in an attendance on every duty, and resisting and
   militating against all manner of sin, and to continue in such a
   pursuit.

   There are two things needful in a person, in order to these strong
   resolutions; there must be a sense of the great importance and
   necessity of the mercy sought, and there must also be a sense of
   opportunity to obtain it, or the encouragement there is to seek it. The
   strength of resolution depends on the sense which God gives to the
   heart of these things. Persons without such a sense, may seem to
   themselves to take up resolutions; they may, as it were, force a
   promise to themselves, and say within themselves, "I will seek as long
   as I live, I will not give up till I obtain," when they do but deceive
   themselves. Their hearts are not in it; neither do they indeed take up
   any such resolution as they seem to themselves to do. It is the
   resolution of the mouth more than of the heart; their hearts are not
   strongly bent to fulfill what their mouth says. The firmness of the
   resolution lies in the fulness of the disposition of the heart to do
   what is resolved to be done. Those who are pressing into the kingdom of
   God, have a disposition of heart to do everything that is required, and
   that lies in their power to do, and to continue in it. They have not
   only earnestness, but steadiness of resolution: they do not seek with a
   wavering unsteady heart, by turns or fits, being off and on; but it is
   the constant bent of the soul, if possible, to obtain the kingdom of
   God.

   3. By pressing into the kingdom of God is signified greatness of
   endeavor. It is expressed in Ecclesiastes 10:10. by doing what our hand
   finds to do with our might. And this is the natural and necessary
   consequence of the two forementioned things. Where there is strength of
   desire, and firmness of resolution, there will be answerable endeavors.
   Persons thus engaged in their hearts will "strive to enter in at the
   strait gate," and will be violent for heaven; their practice will be
   agreeable to the counsel of the wise man, in Proverbs 2 at the
   beginning, "My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my
   commandments with thee; so that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and
   apply thine heart to understanding; yea, if thou criest after
   knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding; if thou seekest
   her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures; then shalt
   thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God."
   Here the earnestness of desire and strength of resolution is signified
   by inclining the ear to wisdom, and applying the heart to
   understanding; and the greatness of endeavor is denoted by crying after
   knowledge, and lifting up the voice for understanding; seeking her as
   silver, and searching for her as for hid treasures: such desires and
   resolutions, and such endeavors go together.

   4. Pressing into the kingdom of God denotes an engagedness and
   earnestness, that is directly about that business of getting into the
   kingdom of God. Persons may be in very great exercise and distress of
   mind, and that about the condition of their souls; their thoughts and
   cares may be greatly engaged and taken up about things of a spiritual
   nature, and yet not be pressing into the kingdom of God, nor towards
   it. The exercise of their minds is not directly about the work of
   seeking salvation, in a diligent attendance on the means that God hath
   appointed in order to it, but something else that is beside their
   business; it may be God's decrees and secret purposes, prying into
   them, searching for signs whereby they may determine, or at least
   conjecture, what they are before God makes them known by their
   accomplishment. They distress their minds with fears that they be not
   elected, or that they have committed the unpardonable sin, or that
   their day is past, and that God has given them up to judicial and final
   hardness, and never intends to show them mercy; and therefore, that it
   is in vain for them to seek salvation. Or they entangle themselves
   about the doctrine of original sin, and other mysterious doctrines of
   religion that are above their comprehension.

   Many persons that seem to be in great distress about a future eternal
   state, get much into a way of perplexing themselves with such things as
   these. When it is so, let them be never so much concerned and engaged
   in their minds, they cannot be said to be pressing towards the kingdom
   of God: because their exercise is not in their work, but rather that
   which tends to hinder them in their work. If they are violent, they are
   only working violently to entangle themselves, and lay blocks in their
   own way; their pressure is not forwards. Instead of getting along, they
   do but lose their time, and worse than merely lose it; instead of
   fighting with the giants that stand in the way to keep them out of
   Canaan, they spend away their time and strength in conflicting with
   shadows that appear by the wayside.

   Hence we are not to judge of the hopefulness of the way that persons
   are in, or of the probability of their success in seeking salvation,
   only by the greatness of the concern and distress that they are in; for
   many persons have needless distresses that they had much better be
   without. It is thus very often with persons overrun with the distemper
   of melancholy: whence the adversary of souls is wont to take great
   advantage. But then are persons in the most likely way to obtain the
   kingdom of heaven, when the intent of their minds, and the engagedness
   of their spirits, be about their proper work and business, and all the
   bent of their souls is to attend on God's means, and to do what he
   commands and directs them to. The apostle tells us, I Corinthians 9:26.
   "that he did not fight as those that beat the air." Our time is short
   enough; we had not need to spend it in that which is nothing to the
   purpose. There are real difficulties and enemies enough for persons to
   encounter, to employ all their strength; they had not need to waste it
   in fighting with phantoms.

   5. By pressing into the kingdom of God is denoted a breaking through
   opposition and difficulties. There is in the expression a plain
   intimation of difficulty. If there were no opposition, but the way was
   all clear and open, there would be no need of pressing to get along.
   They therefore that are pressing into the kingdom of God, go on with
   such engagedness, that they break through the difficulties that are in
   the way. They are so set for salvation, that those things by which
   others are discouraged, and stopped, and turned back, do not stop them,
   but they press through them. Persons ought to be so resolved for
   heaven, that if by any means they can obtain, they will obtain. Whether
   those means be difficult or easy, cross or agreeable, if they are
   requisite means of salvation, they should be complied with. When
   anything is presented to be done, the question should not be, Is it
   easy or hard? is it agreeable to my carnal inclinations or interest, or
   against them? But is it a required means of my obtaining an interest in
   Jesus Christ, and eternal salvation? Thus the apostle, Philippians
   3:11. "If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the
   dead." He tells us there in the context what difficulties he broke
   through, that he suffered the loss of all things, and was willingly
   made conformable even to Christ's death, though that was attended with
   such extreme torment and ignominy.

   He that is pressing into the kingdom of God, commonly finds many things
   in the way that are against the grain; but he is not stopped by the
   cross that lies before him, but takes it up, and carries it. Suppose
   there be something incumbent on him to do, that is cross to his natural
   temper, and irksome to him on that account; suppose something that he
   cannot do without suffering in his estate, or that he apprehends will
   look odd and strange in the eyes of others, and expose him to ridicule
   and reproach, or any thing that will offend a neighbor, and get his
   ill-will, or something that will be very cross to his own carnal
   appetite-he will press through such difficulties. Everything that is
   found to be a weight that hinders him in running this race he casts
   from him, though it be a weight of gold or pearls; yea, if it be a
   right hand or foot that offends him, he will cut them off, and will not
   stick at plucking out a right eye with his own hands. These things are
   insuperable difficulties to those who are not thoroughly engaged in
   seeking their salvation; they are stumbling-blocks that they never get
   over. But it is not so with him that presses into the kingdom of God.
   Those things (before he was thoroughly roused from his security) about
   which he was wont to have long parleyings and disputings with his own
   conscience-employing carnal reason to invent arguments and pleas of
   excuse-he now sticks at no longer; he has done with this endless
   disputing and reasoning, and presses violently through all
   difficulties.

   Let what will be in the way, heaven is what he must and will obtain,
   not if he can without difficulty, but if it be possible. He meets with
   temptation: the devil is often whispering in his ear, setting
   allurements before him, magnifying the difficulties of the work he is
   engaged in, telling him that they are insuperable, and that he can
   never conquer them, and trying all ways in the world to discourage him;
   but still he presses forward. God has given and maintains such an
   earnest spirit for heaven, that the devil cannot stop him in his
   course; he is not at leasure to lend an ear to what he has to say.-I
   come now,
    1. To show why the kingdom of heaven should be sought in this
       manner.-It should be thus sought,

   1. On account of the extreme necessity we are in of getting into the
   kingdom of heaven. We are in a perishing necessity of it; without it we
   are utterly and eternally lost. Out of the kingdom of God is no safety;
   there is no other hiding-place; this is the only city of refuge, in
   which we can be secure from the avenger that pursues all the ungodly.
   The vengeance of God will pursue, overtake, and eternally destroy, them
   that are not in this kingdom. All that are without this enclosure will
   be swallowed up in an overflowing fiery deluge of wrath. They may stand
   at the door and knock, and cry, Lord, Lord, open to us, in vain; they
   will be thrust back; and God will have no mercy on them; they shall be
   eternally left of him. His fearful vengence will seize them; the devils
   will lay hold of them; and all evil will come upon them; and there will
   be none to pity or help; their case will be utterly desperate, and
   infinitely doleful. It will be a gone case with them; all offers of
   mercy and expressions of divine goodness will be finally withdrawn, and
   all hope will be lost. God will have no kind of regard to their
   well-being; will take no care of them to save them from any enemy, or
   any evil; but himself will be their dreadful enemy, and will execute
   wrath with fury, and will take vengeance in an inexpressibly dreadful
   manner. Such as shall be in this case will be lost and undone indeed!
   They will be sunk down into perdition, infinitely below all that we can
   think. For who knows the power of God's anger? And who knows the misery
   of that poor worm, on whom that anger is executed without mercy?

   2. On account of the shortness and uncertainty of the opportunity for
   getting into this kingdom. When a few days are past, all our
   opportunity for it will be gone. Our day is limited. God has set our
   bounds, and we know not where. While persons are out of this kingdom,
   they are in danger every hour of being overtaken with wrath. We know
   not how soon we shall get past that line, beyond which there is no
   work, device, knowledge, nor wisdom; and therefore we should do what we
   have to do with our might, Ecclesiastes 9:10.

   3. On account of the difficulty of getting into the kingdom of God.
   There are innumerable difficulties in the way; such as few conquer:
   most of them that try have not resolution, courage, earnestness, and
   constancy enough; but they fail, give up, and perish. The difficulties
   are too many and too great for them that do not violently press
   forward. They never get along, but stick by the way; are turned aside,
   or turned back, and ruined. Matthew 7:14. "Strait is the gate, and
   narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find
   it." Luke 13:24. "Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many, I
   say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able."

   4. The possibility of obtaining. Though it be attended with so much
   difficulty, yet it is not a thing impossible. Acts 8:22. "If perhaps
   the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee." II Timothy 2:25. "If
   peradventure God will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the
   truth." However sinful a person is, and whatever his circumstances are,
   there is, notwithstanding, a possibility of his salvation. He himself
   is capable of it, and God is able to accomplish it, and has mercy
   sufficient for it; and there is sufficient provision made through
   Christ, that God may do it consistent with the honour of his majesty,
   justice, and truth. So that there is no want either of sufficiency in
   God, or capacity in the sinner, in order to this. The greatest and
   vilest most blind, dead, hard-hearted sinner living, is a subject
   capable of saving light and grace. Seeing therefore there is such a
   necessity of obtaining the kingdom of God, and so short a time, and
   such difficulty, and yet such a possibility, it may well induce us to
   press into it. Jonah 3:8, 9.

   5. It is meet that the kingdom of heaven should be thus sought, because
   of the great excellency of it. We are willing to seek earthly things,
   of trifling value, with great diligence, and through much difficulty;
   it therefore certainly becomes us to seek that with great earnestness
   which is of infinitely greater worth and excellence. And how well may
   God expect and require it of us, that we should seek it in such a
   manner, in order to our obtaining it!

   6. Such a manner of seeking is needful to prepare persons for the
   kingdom of God. Such earnestness and thoroughness of endeavors, is the
   ordinary means that God makes use of to bring persons to an
   acquaintance with themselves, to a sight of their own hearts, to a
   sense of their own helplessness, and to a despair in their own strength
   and righteousness. And such engagedness and constancy in seeking the
   kingdom of heaven, prepare the soul to receive it the more joyfully and
   thankfully, and the more highly to prize and value it when obtained. So
   that it is in mercy to us, as well as for the glory of his own name,
   that God has appointed such earnest seeking, to be the way in which he
   will bestow the kingdom of heaven.

  APPLICATION

   The use I would make of this doctrine, is of exhortation to all
   Christless persons to press into the kingdom of God. Some of you are
   inquiring what you shall do? You seem to desire to know what is the way
   wherein salvation is to be sought, and how you may be likely to obtain
   it. You have now heard the way that the holy word of God directs to.
   Some are seeking, but it cannot be said of them that they are pressing
   into the kingdom of heaven. There are many that in time past have
   sought salvation, but not in this manner, and so they never obtained,
   but are now gone to hell. Some of them sought it year after year, but
   failed of it, and perished at last. They were overtaken with divine
   wrath, and are now suffering the fearful misery of damnation, and have
   no rest day nor night, having no more opportunity to seek, but must
   suffer and be miserable throughout the never-ending ages of eternity.
   Be exhorted, therefore, not to seek salvation as they did, but let the
   kingdom of heaven suffer violence from you.

   Here I would first answer an objection or two, and then proceed to give
   some directions how to press into the kingdom of God.

   Objection. 1. Some may be ready to say, We cannot do this of ourselves;
   that strength of desire, and firmness of resolution, that have been
   spoken of, are out of our reach. If I endeavor to resolve and to seek
   with engagedness of spirit, I find I fail; my thoughts are presently
   off from the business, and I feel myself dull, and my engagedness
   relaxed, in spite of all I can do.

   Answer. 1. Though earnestness of mind be not immediately in your power,
   yet the consideration of what has been now said of the need of it, may
   be a means of stirring you up to it. It is true, persons never will be
   thoroughly engaged in this business, unless it be by God's influence;
   but God influences persons by means. Persons are not stirred up to a
   thorough earnestness without some considerations that move them to it.
   And if persons can but be made sensible of the necessity of salvation,
   and also duly consider the exceeding difficuly of it, and the greatness
   of the opposition, and how short and uncertain the time is, but yet are
   sensible that they have an opportunity, and that there is a possibility
   of their obtaining, they will need no more in order to their being
   thoroughly engaged and resolved in this matter. If we see persons slack
   and unresolved, and unsteady, it is because they do not enough consider
   these things.

   2. Though strong desires and resolutions of mind be not in your power,
   yet painfulness of endeavors is in your power. It is in your power to
   take pains in the use of means, yea very great pains. You can be very
   painful and diligent in watching your own heart, and striving against
   sin. Though there is all manner of corruption in the heart continually
   ready to work, yet you can very laboriously watch and strive against
   these corruptions; and it is in your power, with great diligence to
   attend the matter of your duty towards God and towards your neighbour.
   It is in your power to attend all ordinances, and all public and
   private duties of religion, and to do it with your might. It would be a
   contradiction to suppose that a man cannot do these things with all the
   might he has, though he cannot do them with more might than he has. The
   dullness and deadness of the heart, and slothfulness of disposition, do
   not hinder men being able to take pains, though it hinders their being
   willing. That is one thing wherein your laboriousness may appear, even
   striving against your own dullness. That men have a dead and sluggish
   heart, does not argue that they be not able to take pains; it is so far
   from that, that it gives occasion for pains. It is one of the
   difficulties in the way of duty, that persons have to strive with, and
   that gives occasion for struggling and labour. If there were no
   difficulties attended seeking salvation, there would be no occasion for
   striving; a man would have nothing to strive about. There is indeed a
   great deal of difficulty attending all duties required of those that
   would obtain heaven. It is an exceeding difficult thing for them to
   keep their thoughts; it is a difficult thing seriously, or to any good
   purpose, to consider matters of greatest importance; it is a difficult
   thing to hear, or read, or pray attentively. But it does not argue that
   a man cannot strive in these things because they are difficult; nay, he
   could not strive therein if there were not difficulty in them. For what
   is there excepting difficulties that any can have to strive or struggle
   with in any affair or business? Earnestness of mind, and diligence of
   endeavor, tend to promote each other. He that has a heart earnestly
   engaged, will take pains; and he that is diligent and painful in all
   duty, probably will not be so long before he finds the sensibleness of
   his heart and earnestness of his spirit greatly increased.

   Objection 2. Some may object, that if they are earnest, and take a
   great deal of pains, they shall be in danger of trusting to what they
   do; they are afraid of doing their duty for fear of making a
   righteousness of it.

   Answer. There is ordinarily no kind of seekers that trust so much to
   what they do, as slack and dull seekers. Though all seeking salvation,
   that have never been the subjects of a thorough humiliation, do trust
   in their own righteousness; yet some do it much more fully than others.
   Some though they trust in their own righteousness, yet are not quiet in
   it. And those who are most disturbed in their self-confidence, (and
   therefore in the likeliest way to be wholly brought off from it,) are
   not such as go on in a remiss way of seeking, but such as are most
   earnest and thoroughly engaged; partly because in such a way conscience
   is kept more sensible. A more awakened conscience will not rest so
   quietly in moral and religious duties, as one that is less awakened. A
   dull seeker's conscience will be in a great measure satisfied and
   quieted with his own works and performances; but one that is thoroughly
   awakened cannot be stilled or pacified with such things as these. In
   this way persons gain much more knowledge of themselves, and
   acquaintance with their own hearts, than in a negligent, slight way of
   seeking; for they have a great deal more experience of themselves. It
   is experience of ourselves, and finding what we are, that God commonly
   makes use of as the means of bringing us off from all dependence on
   ourselves. But men never get acquaintance with themselves so fast, as
   in the most earnest way of seeking. They that are in this way have more
   to engage them to think of their sins, and strictly to observe
   themselves, and have much more to do with their own hearts, than
   others. Such a one has much more experience of his own weakness, than
   another that does not put forth and try his strength; and will
   therefore sooner see himself dead in sin. Such a one, though he hath a
   disposition continually to be flying to his own righteousness, yet
   finds rest in nothing; he wanders about from one thing to another,
   seeking something to ease his disquieted conscience; he is driven from
   one refuge to another, goes from mountain to hill, seeking rest and
   finding none; and therefore will the sooner prove that there is no rest
   to be found, nor trust to be put, in any creature whatsoever.

   It is therefore quite a wrong notion that some entertain, that the more
   they do, the more they shall depend on it. Whereas the reverse is true;
   the more they do, or the more thorough they are in seeking, the less
   will they be likely to rest in their doings, and the sooner will they
   see the vanity of all that they do. So that persons will exceedingly
   miss it, if ever they neglect to do any duty either to God or man,
   whether it be any duty of religion, justice, or charity, under a notion
   of its exposing them to trust in their own righteousness. It is very
   true, that it is a common thing for persons, when they earnestly seek
   salvation, to trust in the pains that they take: but yet commonly those
   that go on in a more slight way, trust a great deal more securely to
   their dull services, than he that is pressing into the kingdom of God
   does to his earnestness. Men's slackness in religion, and their trust
   in their own righteousness, strengthen and establish one another. Their
   trust in what they have done, and what they now do, settles them in a
   slothful rest and ease, and hinders their being sensible of their need
   of rousing up themselves and pressing forward. And on the other hand,
   their negligence tends so to benumb them in such ignorance of
   themselves, that the most miserable refuges are stupidly rested in as
   sufficient. Therefore we see, that when persons have been going on for
   a long time in such a way, and God afterwards comes more thoroughly to
   awaken them, and to stir them up to be in good earnest, he shakes all
   their old foundations, and rouses them out of their old resting places;
   so that they cannot quiet themselves with those things that formerly
   kept them secure. I would now proceed to give some directions how you
   should press into the kingdom of God.

   1. Be directed to sacrifice every thing to your soul's eternal
   interest. Let seeking this be so much your bent, and what you are so
   resolved in, that you will make every thing give place to it. Let
   nothing stand before your resolution of seeking the kingdom of God.
   Whatever it be that you used to look upon as a convenience, or comfort,
   or ease, or thing desirable on any account, if it stands in the way of
   this great concern, let it be dismissed without hesitation; and if it
   be of that nature that it is likely always to be a hinderance, then
   wholly have done with it, and never entertain any expectation from it
   more. If in time past you have, for the sake of worldly gain, involved
   yourself in more care and business than you find to be consistent with
   your being so thorough in the business of religion as you ought to be,
   then get into some other way, though you suffer in your worldly
   interest by it. Or if you have heretofore been conversant with company
   that you have reason to think have been and will be a snare to you, and
   a hinderance to this great design in any wise, break off from their
   society, however it may expose you to reproach from your old
   companions, or let what will be the effect of it. Whatever it be that
   stands in the way of your most advantageously seeking salvation-whether
   it be some dear sinful pleasure, or strong carnal appetite, or credit
   and honour, or the good-will of some persons whose friendship you
   desire, and whose esteem and liking you have highly valued-and though
   there be danger, if you do as you ought, that you shall looked upon by
   them as odd and ridiculous, and become contemptible in their eyes-or if
   it be your ease and indolence and aversion to continual labour; or your
   outward convenience in any respect, whereby you might avoid
   difficulties of one kind or other-let all go; offer up all such things
   together, as it were, in one sacrifice, to the interest of your soul.
   Let nothing stand in competition with this, but make every thing to
   fall before it. If the flesh must be crossed, then cross it, spare it
   not, crucify it, and do not be afraid of being too cruel to it.
   Galatians 5:24. "They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with
   the affections and lusts." Have no dependence on any worldly enjoyment
   whatsoever. Let salvation be the one thing with you. This is what is
   certainly required of you: and this is what many stick at; this giving
   up other things for salvation, is a stumbling-block that few get over.
   While others pressed into the kingdom of God at the preaching of John
   the Baptist, Herod was pretty much stirred up by his preaching. It is
   said, he heard him, and observed him, and did many things; but when he
   came to tell him that he must part with his beloved Herodias, here he
   stuck; this he never would yield to, Mark 7:18-20. The rich young man
   was considerably concerned for salvation; and accordingly was a very
   strict liver in many things: but when Christ came to direct him to go
   and sell all that he had, and give to the poor, and come and follow
   him, he could not find in his heart to comply with it, but went away
   sorrowful. He had great possessions, and set his heart much on his
   estate, and could not bear to part with it. It may be, if Christ had
   directed him only to give away a considerable part of his estate, he
   would have done it; yea, perhaps, if he had bid him part with half of
   it, he would have complied with it: but when he directed him to throw
   up all, he could not grapple with such a proposal. Herein the
   straitness of the gate very much consists; and it is on this account
   that so many seek to enter in, and are not able. There are many that
   have a great mind to salvation, and spend great part of their time in
   wishing they had it, but they will not comply with the necessary means.

   2. Be directed to forget the things that are behind: that is, not to
   keep thinking and making much of what you have done, but let your mind
   be wholly intent on what you have to do. In some sense you ought to
   look back; you should look back to your sins. Jeremiah 2:23. "See thy
   way in the valley, know what thou hast done." You should look back on
   the wretchedness of your religious performances, and consider how you
   have fallen short in them; how exceedingly polluted all your duties
   have been, and how justly God might reject and loathe them, and you for
   them. But you ought not to spend your time in looking back, as many
   persons do, thinking how much they have done for their salvation; what
   great pains they have taken, how that they have done what they can, and
   do not see how they can do more; how long a time they have been
   seeking, and how much more they have done than others, and even than
   such and such who have obtained mercy. They think with themselves how
   hardly God deals with them, that he does not extend mercy to them, but
   turns a deaf ear to their cries; and hence discourage themselves, and
   complain of God. Do not thus spend your time in looking back on what is
   past, but look forward, and consider what is before you; consider what
   it is that you can do, and what it is necessary that you should do, and
   what God calls you still to do, in order to your own salvation. The
   apostle, in the third chapter to the Philippians, tells us what things
   he did while a Jew, how much he had to boast of, if any could boast;
   but he tells us, that he forgot those things, and all other things that
   were behind, and reached forth towards the things that were before,
   pressing forwards towards the mark for the prize of the high calling of
   God in Christ Jesus.

   3. Labour to get your heart thoroughly disposed to go on and hold out
   to the end. Many that seem to be earnest have not a heart thus
   disposed. It is a common thing for persons to appear greatly affected
   for a little while; but all is soon past away, and there is no more to
   be seen of it. Labour therefore to obtain a thorough willingness and
   preparation of spirit, to continue seeking, in the use of your utmost
   endeavours, without limitation; and do not think your whole life too
   long. And in order to this, be advised to two things,

   (1.) Remember that if ever God bestows mercy upon you, he will use his
   sovereign pleasure about the time when. He will bestow it on some in a
   little time, and on others not till they have sought it long. If other
   persons are soon enlightened and comforted, while you remain long in
   darkness, there is no other way but for you to wait. God will act
   arbitrarily in this matter, and you cannot help it. You must even be
   content to wait, in a way of laborious and earnest striving, till his
   time comes. If you refuse, you will but undo yourself; and when you
   shall hereafter find yourself undone, and see that your case is past
   remedy, how will you condemn yourself for foregoing a great probability
   of salvation, only because you had not the patience to hold out, and
   was not willing to be at the trouble of a persevering labour! And what
   will it avail before God or your own conscience to say, that you could
   not bear to be obliged to seek salvation so long, when God bestowed it
   on others that sought it but for a very short time? Though God may have
   bestowed the testimonies of his favour on others in a few days or hours
   after they have begun earnestly to seek it, how does that alter the
   case as to you, if there proves to be a necessity of your laboriously
   seeking many years before you obtain them? Is salvation less worth
   taking a great deal of pains for, because, through the sovereign
   pleasure of God, others have obtained it with comparatively little
   pains? If there are two persons, the one of which has obtained
   converting grace with comparative ease, and another that has obtained
   it after continuing for many years in the greatest and most earnest
   labours after it, how little difference does it make at last, when once
   salvation is obtained! Put all the labour and pains, the long-continued
   difficulties and strugglings, of the one in the scale against
   salvation, and how little does it subtract; and put the ease with which
   the other has obtained in the scale with salvation, and how little does
   it add! What is either added or subtracted is lighter than vanity, and
   a thing worthy of no consideration, when compared with that infinite
   benefit that is obtained. Indeed if you were ten thousand years, and
   all that time should strive and press forward with as great earnestness
   as ever a person did for one day, all this would bear no proportion to
   the importance of the benefit; and it will doubtless appear little to
   you, when once you come to be in actual possession of eternal glory,
   and to see what that eternal misery is which you have escaped. You must
   not think much of your pains, and of the length of time; you must press
   towards the kingdom of God, and do your utmost, and hold out to the
   end, and learn to make no account of it when you have done. You must
   undertake the business of seeking salvation upon these terms, and with
   no other expectations than this, that if ever God bestows mercy it will
   be in his own time; and not only so, but also that when you have done
   all, God will not hold himself obliged to show you mercy at last.

   (2.) Endeavour now thoroughly to weigh in your mind the difficulty, and
   to count the cost of perseverence in seeking salvation. You that are
   now setting out in this business, (as there are many here who have very
   lately set about it;-Praised be the name of God that he has stirred you
   up to it!) be exhorted to attend this direction. Do not undertake in
   this affair with any other thought but of giving yourself wholly to it
   for the remaining part of your life, and going through many and great
   difficulties in it. Take heed that you do not engage secretly upon this
   condition, that you shall obtain in a little time, promising yourself
   that it shall be within this present season of the pouring out of God's
   Spirit, or with any other limitation of time whatsoever. Many, when
   they begin, (seeming to set out very earnestly,) do not expect that
   they shall need to seek very long, and so do not prepare themselves for
   it. And therefore, when they come to find it otherwise, and meet with
   unexpected difficulty, they are found unguarded, and easily overthrown.
   But let me advise you all who are now seeking salvation, not to
   entertain any self-flattering thoughts; but weigh the utmost
   difficulties of perseverance, and be provided for them, having your
   mind fixed in it to go through them, let them be what they will.
   Consider now beforehand, how tedious it would be, with utmost
   earnestness and labour, to strive after salvation for many years, in
   the mean time receiving no joyful or comfortable evidence of your
   having obtained. Consider what a great temptation to discouragement
   there probably would be in it; how apt you would be to yield the case;
   how ready to think that it is in vain for you to seek any longer, and
   that God never intends to show you mercy, in that he has not yet done
   it; how apt you would be to think with yourself, "What an uncomfortable
   life do I live! How much more unpleasantly do I spend my time than
   others that do not perplex their minds about the things of another
   world, but are at ease, and take the comfort of their worldly
   enjoyments!" Consider what a temptation there would probably be in it,
   if you saw others brought in that began to seek the kingdom of heaven
   long after you, rejoicing in a hope and sense of God's favour, after
   but little pains and a short time of awakening; while you, from day to
   day, and from year to year, seemed to labour in vain. Prepare for such
   tempations now. Lay in beforehand for such trials and difficulties,
   that you may not think any strange thing has happened when they come.

   I hope that those who have given attention to what has been said, have
   by this time conceived, in some measure, what is signified by the
   expression in the text, and after what manner they ought to press into
   the kingdom of God. Here is this to induce you to a compliance with
   what you have been directed to; if you sit still, you die; if you go
   backward, behold you shall surely die; if you go forward, you may live.
   And though God has not bound himself to any thing that a person does
   while destitute of faith, and out of Christ, yet there is great
   probability, that in a way of hearkening to this counsel you will live;
   and that by pressing onward, and persevering, you will at last, as it
   were by violence, take the kingdom of heaven. Those of you who have not
   only heard the directions given, but shall through God's merciful
   assistance, practise according to them, are those that probably will
   overcome. These we may well hope at last to see standing with the Lamb
   on mount Sion, clothed in white robes, with palms in their hands; when
   all your labour and toil will be abundantly compensated, and you will
   not repent that you have taken so much pains, and denied yourself much,
   and waited so long. This self-denial, this waiting, will then look
   little, and vanish into nothing in your eyes, being all swallowed up in
   the first minute's enjoyment of that glory that you will then possess,
   and will uninterruptedly possess and enjoy to all eternity.

   4th Direction. Improve the present season of the pouring out of the
   Spirit of God on this town. Prudence is any affair whatsoever consists
   very much in minding and improving our opportunities. If you would have
   spiritual prosperity, you must exercise prudence in the concerns of
   your souls, as well as in outward concerns when you seek outward
   prosperity. The prudent husbandman will observe his opportunities; he
   will improve seed-time and harvest; he will make his advantage of the
   showers and shines of heaven. The prudent merchant will discern his
   opportunities; he will not be idle on a market-day; he is careful not
   to let slip his seasons for enriching himself: So will those who
   prudently seek the fruits of righteousness, and the merchandise of
   wisdom, improve their opportunities for their eternal wealth and
   happiness.

   God is pleased at this time, in a very remarkable manner, to pour out
   his Spirit amongst us; (glory be to his name!) You that have a mind to
   obtain converting grace, and to go to heaven when you die, now is your
   season! Now, if you have any sort of prudence for your own salvation,
   and have not a mind to go to hell, improve this season! Now is the
   accepted time! Now is the day of salvation! You that in time past have
   been called upon, and have turned a deaf ear to God's voice, and long
   stood out and resisted his commands and counsels, hear God's voice
   today, while it is called today! Do not harden your hearts at such a
   day as this! Now you have a special and remarkable price put into your
   hands to get wisdom, if you have but a heart to improve it.

   God hath his certain days or appointed seasons of exercising both mercy
   and judgment. There are some remarkable times of wrath, laid out by God
   for his awful visitation, and the executions of his anger; which times
   are called days of vengeance, Proverbs 6:34. Wherein God will visit
   sin, Exodus 32:34. And so, on the contrary, God has laid out in his
   sovereign counsels seasons of remarkable mercy, wherein he will
   manifest himself in the exercises of his grace and loving-kindness,
   more than at other times. Such times in Scripture are called by way of
   eminency, accepted times, and days of salvation, and also days of God's
   visitation; because they are days wherein God will visit in a way of
   mercy; as in Luke 19:44. "And shall lay thee even with the ground, and
   thy children within thee; and they shall not leave in thee one stone
   upon another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation." It
   is such a time now in this town; it is with us a day of God's gracious
   visitation. It is indeed a day of grace with us as long as we live in
   this world, in the enjoyment of the means of grace; but such a time as
   this is especially, and in a distinguishing manner, a day of grace.
   There is a door of mercy always standing open for sinners; but such a
   day as this, God opens an extraordinary door.

   We are directed to seek the Lord while he may be found, and to call
   upon him while he is near, Isaiah 55:6. If you that are hitherto
   Christless, be not strangely besotted and infatuated, you will by all
   means improve such an opportunity as this to get heaven, when heaven is
   brought so near, when the fountain is opened in the midst of us in so
   extraordinary a manner. Now is the time to obtain a supply of the
   necessities of your poor perishing souls! This is the day for sinners
   that have a mind to be converted before they die, when God is dealing
   forth so liberally and bountifully amongst us; when conversion and
   salvation work is going on amongst us from sabbath to sabbath, and many
   are pressing into the kingdom of God! Now do not stay behind, but press
   in amongst the rest! Others have been stirred up to be in good earnest,
   and have taken heaven by violence; be entreated to follow their
   example, if you would have a part of the inheritance with them, and
   would not be left at the great day, when they are taken!

   How should it move you to consider that you have this opportunity now
   in your hands! You are in the actual possession of it! If it were past,
   it would not be in your power to recover it, or in the power of any
   creature to bring it back for you; but it is not past; it is now, at
   this day. Now is the accepted time, even while it is called today! Will
   you sit still at such a time? Will you sleep in such a harvest? Will
   you deal with a slack hand, and stay behind out of mere sloth, or love
   to some lust, or lothness to grapple with some small difficulty, or to
   put yourself a little out of your way, when so many are flowing to the
   goodness of the Lord? You are behind still; and so you will be in
   danger of being left behind, when the whole number is completed that
   are to enter in, if you do not earnestly bestir yourself! To be left
   behind at the close of such a season as this, will be awful-next to
   being left behind on that day when God's saints shall mount up as with
   wings to meet the Lord in the air-and will be what will appear very
   threatening of it.

   God is now calling you in an extraordinary manner: and it is agreeable
   to the will and word of Christ, that I should now, in his name, call
   you, as one set over you, and sent to you to that end; so it is his
   will that you should hearken to what I say, as his voice. I therefore
   beseech you in Christ's stead now to press into the kingdom of God!
   Whoever you are, whether young or old, small or great; if you are a
   great sinner, if you have been a backslider, if you have quenched the
   Spirit, be who you will, do not stand making objections, but arise,
   apply yourself to your work! Do what you have to do with your might.
   Christ is calling you before, and holding forth his grace, and
   everlasting benefits, and wrath is pursuing you behind; wherefore fly
   for your life, and look not behind you! But here I would particularly
   direct myself to several sorts of persons.

   I. To those sinners who are in a measure awakened, and are concerned
   for their salvation. You have reason to be glad that you have such an
   opportunity, and to prize it above gold. To induce you to prize and
   improve it, consider several things.

   1. God has doubtless a design now to deal forth saving blessings to a
   number. God has done it to some already, and it is not probable that he
   has yet finished his work amongst us: we may well hope still to see
   others brought out of darkness into marvellous light. And therefore,

   2. God comes this day, and knocks at many persons' doors, and at your
   door among the rest. God seems to be come in a very unusual manner
   amongst us, upon a gracious and merciful design; a design of saving a
   number of poor miserable souls out of a lost and perishing condition,
   and of bringing them into a happy state and eternal glory! This is
   offered to you, not only as it has always been in the word and
   ordinances, but by the particular influences of the Spirit of Christ
   awakening you! This special offer is made to many amongst us; and you
   are not passed over. Christ has not forgot you; but has come to your
   door; and there as it were stands waiting for you to open to him. If
   you have wisdom and discretion to discern your own advantage, you will
   know that now is your opportunity.

   3. How much more easily converting grace is obtained at such a time,
   than at other times! The work is equally easy with God at all times;
   but there is far less difficulty in the way as to men at such a time,
   than at other times. It is, as I said before, a day of God's gracious
   visitation; a day that he has as it were set apart for the more
   liberally and bountifully dispensing of his grace; a day wherein God's
   hand is opened wide. Experience shows it. God seems to be more ready to
   help, to give proper convictions, to help against temptations, and let
   in divine light. He seems to carry on his work with a more glorious
   discovery of his power, and Satan is more chained up than at other
   times. Those difficulties and temptations that persons before struck
   at, from year to year, they are soon helped over. The work of God is
   carried on with greater speed and swiftness, and there are often
   instances of sudden conversion at such a time. So it was in the
   apostles' days, when there was a time of the most extraordinary pouring
   out of the Spirit that ever was. How quick and sudden were conversions
   in those days! Such instances as that of the jailer abounded then, in
   fulfillment of that prophecy, Isaiah 66:7, 8. "Before she travailed,
   she brought forth: before her pain came she was delivered of a
   man-child. Who hath heard such a thing? Who hath seen such things? For
   as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children." So it is in
   some degree, whenever there is an extraordinary pouring out of the
   Spirit of God; more or less so, in proportion to the greatness of that
   effusion. There is seldom such quick work made of it at other times.
   Persons are not so soon delivered from their various temptations and
   entanglements; but are much longer wandering in a wilderness, and
   groping in darkness. And yet,

   4. There are probably some here present that are now concerned about
   their salvation, that will never obtain. It is not to be supposed that
   all that are now moved and awakened, will ever be savingly converted.
   Doubtless there are many now seeking that will not be able to enter.
   When has it been so in times past, when there has been times of great
   outpourings of God's Spirit, but that many who for a while have
   inquired with others, what they should do to be saved, have failed, and
   afterwards grown hard and secure? All of you that are now awakened,
   have a mind to obtain salvation, and probably hope to get a title to
   heaven, in the time of this present moving of God's Spirit: but yet,
   (though it be awful to be spoken, and awful to be thought) we have no
   reason to think any other, than that some of you will burn in hell to
   all eternity. You all are afraid of hell, and seem at present disposed
   to take pains to be delivered from it; and yet it would be unreasonable
   to think any other, than that some of you will have your portion in the
   lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Though there are so many that
   seem to obtain so easily, having been but a little while under
   convictions, yet, for all that, some never will obtain. Some will soon
   lose the sense of things they now have; though their awakenings seem to
   be very considerable for the present, they will not hold; they have not
   hearts disposed to hold on through very many difficulties. Some that
   have set out for heaven, and hope as much as others to obtain, are
   indeed but slighty and slack, even now, in the midst of such a time as
   this. And others, who for the present seem to be more in earnest, will
   probably, before long, decline and fail, and gradually return to be as
   they were before. The convictions of some seem to be great, while that
   which is the occasion of their convictions is new; which, when that
   begins to grow old, will gradually decay and wear off. Thus, it may be,
   the occasion of your awakening has been the hearing of the conversion
   of some person, or seeing so extraordinary a dispensation of Providence
   as this in which God now appears amongst us; but by and by the newness
   and freshness of these things will be gone, and so will not affect your
   mind as now they do; and it may be your convictions will go away with
   it.

   Though this be a time wherein God doth more liberally bestow his grace,
   and so a time of greater advantage for obtaining it; yet there seems to
   be, upon some accounts, greater danger of backsliding, than when
   persons are awakened at other times. For commonly such extraordinary
   times do not last long; and then when they cease, there are multitudes
   that lose their convictions as it were together.
   We speak of it as a happy thing, that God is pleased to cause such a
   time amongst us, and so it is indeed: but there are some to whom it
   will be no benefit; it will be an occasion of their greater misery;
   they will wish they had never seen this time; it will be more tolerable
   for those that never saw it, or any thing like it, in the day of
   judgment, than for them. It is an awful consideration, that there are
   probably those here, whom the great Judge will hereafter call to a
   strict account about this very thing, why they no better improved this
   opportunity, when he set open the fountain of his grace, and so loudly
   called upon them, and came and strove with them in particular, by the
   awakening influences of his Spirit; and they will have no good account
   to give to the Judge, but their mouths will be stopped, and they will
   stand speechless before him.
   You had need therefore to be earnest, and very resolved in this affair,
   that you may not be one of those who shall thus fail, that you may so
   fight, as not uncertainly, and so run, as that you may win the prize.

   5. Consider in what sad circumstances times of extraordinary effusion
   of God's Spirit commonly leave persons, when they leave them
   unconverted. They find them in a doleful, because in a natural,
   condition; but commonly leave them in a much more doleful condition.
   They are left dreadfully hardened, and with a great increase of guilt,
   and their souls under a more strong dominion and possession of Satan.
   And frequently seasons of extraordinary advantage for salvation,when
   they pass over persons, and they do not improve them, nor receive any
   good in them, seal their damnation. As such seasons leave them, God for
   ever leaves them, and gives them up to judicial hardness. Luke 19:41,
   42. "And when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it,
   saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, the things which belong unto
   thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes."

   6. Consider, that it is very uncertain whether you will ever see such
   another time as this. If there should be such another time, it is very
   uncertain uncertain whether you will live to another time, it is very
   uncertain whether you will eve whether you will live to see it. Many
   that are now concerned for their salvation amongst us, will probably be
   in their graves, and it may be in hell, before that time; and if you
   should miss this opportunity, it may be so with you. And what good will
   that do you, to have the Spirit of God poured out upon earth, in the
   place where you once lived, while you are tormented in hell? What will
   it avail you, that others are crying, What shall I do to be saved?
   while you are shut up for ever in the bottomless pit, and are wailing
   and gnashing your teeth in everlasting burnings?

   Wherefore improve this opportunity, while God is pouring out his
   Spirit, and you are on earth, and while you dwell in the place where
   the Spirit of God is thus poured out, and you yourself have the
   awakening influences of it, that you may never wail and gnash your
   teeth in hell, but may sing in heaven for ever, with others that are
   redeemed from amongst men, and redeemed amongst us.

   7. If you should see another such time, it will be under far greater
   disadvantages than now. You will probably then be much older, and will
   have more hardened your heart; and so will be under less probability of
   receiving good. Some persons are so hardened in sin, and so left of
   God, that they can live through such a time as this, and not be much
   awakened or affected by it; they can stand their ground, and be but
   little moved. And so it may be with you, by another such time, if there
   should be another amongst us, and you should live to see it. The case
   in all probability will be greatly altered with you by that time.

   If you should continue Christless and graceless till then, you will be
   much further from the kingdom of God, and much deeper involved in
   snares and misery; and the devil will probably have a vastly greater
   advantage against you, to tempt and confound you.

   8. We do not know but that God is now gathering in his elect, before
   some great and sore judgment. It has been God's manner before he casts
   off a visible people, or brings some great and destroying judgments
   upon them, first to gather in his elect, that they may be secure. So it
   was before the casting off the Jews from being God's people. There was
   first a very remarkable pouring out of the Spirit, and gathering in of
   the elect, by the preaching of the apostles and evangelists, as we read
   in the beginning of the Acts: but after this the harvest and its
   gleanings were over, the rest were blinded, and hardened; the gospel
   had little success amongst them, and the nation was given up, and cast
   off from being God's people, and their city and land was destroyed by
   the Romans in a terrible manner; and they have been cast off by God now
   for a great many ages, and still remain a hardened and rejected people.
   So we read in the beginning of the 7th chapter of the Revelations, that
   God, when about to bring destroying judgments on the earth, first
   sealed his servants in the forehead. He set his seal upon the hearts of
   the elect, gave them the saving influences and indwelling of his
   Spirit, by which they were sealed to the day of redemption. Revelation
   7:1-3. "And after these things, I saw four angels standing on the four
   corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the
   wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree. And
   I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the
   living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom
   it was given to hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt not the earth,
   neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our
   God in their foreheads."

   And this may be the case now, that God is about, in a great measure, to
   forsake this land, and give up this people, and to bring most awful and
   overwhelming judgments upon it, and that he is now gathering in his
   elect, to secure them from the calamity. The state of the nation, and
   of this land, never looked so threatening of such a thing as at this
   day. The present aspect of things exceedingly threatens vital religion,
   and even those truths that are especially the foundation of it, out of
   this land. If it should be so, how awful will the case be with those
   that shall be left, and not brought in, while God continues the
   influences of his Spirit, to gather in those that are to be redeemed
   from amongst us!

   9. If you neglect the present opportunity, and be finally unbelieving,
   those that are converted in this time of the pouring out of God's
   Spirit will rise up in judgment against you. Your neighbors, your
   relations, acquaintance, or companions that are converted, will that
   day appear against you. They will not only be taken while you are left,
   mounting up with joy to meet the Lord in the air-at his right hand with
   glorious saints and angels, while you are at the left with devils-but
   how they will rise up in judgment against you.

   However friendly you have been together, and have taken pleasure in one
   another's company, and have often familiarly conversed together, they
   will then surely appear against you. They will rise up as witnesses,
   and will declare what a precious opportunity you had, and did not
   improve; how you continued unbelieving, and rejected the offers of a
   Saviour, when those offers were made in so extraordinary a manner, and
   when so many others were prevailed upon to accept of Christ; how you
   was negligent and slack, and did not know the things that belonged to
   your peace, in that your day. And not only so, but they shall be your
   judges, as assessors with the great Judge; and as such will appear
   against you; they will be with the Judge in passing sentence upon you.
   I Corinthians 6:2. "Know ye not that the saints shall judge the world?"
   Christ will admit them to the honour of judging the world with him:
   "They shall sit with him in his throne," Revelation 3:21. "They shall
   sit with Christ in his throne of government, and they shall sit with
   him in his throne of judgment, and shall be judges with him when you
   are judged, and as such shall condemn you.

   10. And lastly, You do not know that you shall live through the present
   time of the pouring out of God's Spirit. You may be taken away in the
   midst of it, or you may be taken away in the beginning of it; as God in
   his providence is putting you in mind, by the late instance of death in
   a young person in the town.* God has of late been very awful in his
   dealings with us, in the repeated deaths of young persons amongst us.
   This should stir every one up to be in the more haste to press into the
   kingdom of God, that so you may be safe whenever death comes. This is a
   blessed season and opportunity; but you do not know how little of it
   you may have. You may have much less of it than others; may by death be
   suddenly snatched away from all advantages that are here enjoyed for
   the good of souls. Therefore make haste, and escape for thy life. One
   moment's delay is dangerous; for wrath is pursuing, and divine
   vengeance hanging over every uncovered person.
   Let these considerations move every one to be improving this
   opportunity, that while others receive saving good, and are made heirs
   of eternal glory, you may not be left behind, in the same miserable
   doleful circumstances in which you came into the world, a poor captive
   to sin and Satan, a lost sheep, a perishing, undone creature, sinking
   down into everlasting perdition; that you may not be one of them spoken
   of, Jeremiah 17:6. "That shall be like the heath in the desert, and
   shall not see when good comes." If you do not improve this opportunity,
   remember I have told you, you will hereafter lament it; and if you do
   not lament it in this world, then I will leave it with you to remember
   it throughout a miserable eternity.

   II. I would address myself to such as yet remain unawakened. It is an
   awful thing that there should be any one person remaining secure
   amongst us at such a time as this; but yet it is to be feared that
   there are some of this sort. I would here a little expostulate with
   such persons.

   * Joseph Clark's wife, a young woman lately married, that died suddenly
   the week before this was delivered.

   1. When do you expect that it will be more likely that you should be
   awakened and wrought upon than now? You are in a Christless condition;
   and yet without doubt intend to go to heaven; and therefore intend to
   be converted some time before you die; but this is not to be expected
   till you are first awakened, and deeply concerned about the welfare of
   your soul, and brought earnestly to seek God's converting grace. And
   when do you intend that this shall be? How do you lay things out in
   your own mind, or what projection have you about this matter? Is it
   ever so likely that a person will be awakened, as at such a time as
   this? How do we see many, who before were secure, now roused out of
   their sleep, and crying, What shall I do to be saved? But you are yet
   secure! Do you flatter yourself that it will be more likely you should
   be awakened when it is a dull and dead time? Do you lay matters out
   thus in your own mind, that though you are senseless when others are
   generally awakened, that yet you shall be awakened when others are
   generally senseless? Or do you hope to see another such time of the
   pouring out of God's Spirit hereafter? And do you think it will be more
   likely that you should be wrought upon then, than now? And why do you
   think so? Is it because then you shall be so much older than you are
   now, and so that your heart will be grown softer and more tender with
   age? or because you will then have stood out so much longer against the
   calls of the gospel, and all means of grace? Do you think it more
   likely that God will give you the needed influences of his Spirit then,
   than now, because then you will have provoked him so much more, and
   your sin and guilt will be so much greater? And do you think it will be
   any benefit to you, to stand it out through the present season of
   grace, as proof against the extraordinary means of awakening there are?
   Do you think that this will be a good preparation for a saving work of
   the Spirit hereafter?

   2. What means do you expect to be awakened by? As to the awakening
   awful things of the word of God, you have had those set before you
   times without number, in the most moving manner that the dispensers of
   the word have been capable of. As to particular solemn warnings,
   directed to those that are in your circumstances, you have had them
   frequently, and have them now from time to time. Do you expect to be
   awakened by awful providences? Those also you have lately had, of the
   most awakening nature, one after another. Do you expect to be moved by
   the deaths of others? We have lately had repeated instances of these.
   There have been deaths of old and young: the year has been remarkable
   for the deaths of young persons in the bloom of life; and some of them
   very sudden deaths. Will the conversion of others move you? There is
   indeed scarce any thing that is found to have so great a tendency to
   stir persons up as this: and this you have been tried with of late in
   frequent instances; but are hitherto proof against it. Will a general
   pouring out of the Spirit, and seeing a conern about salvation amongst
   all sorts of people, do it? This means you now have, but without
   effect. Yea, you have all these things together; you have the solemn
   warnings of God's word, and awful instances of death, and the
   conversion of others, and see a general concern about salvation: but
   all together do not move you to any great concern about your own
   precious, immortal, and miserable soul. Therefore consider by what
   means it is that you expect ever to be awakened.

   You have heard that it is probable some who are now awakened, will
   never obtain salvation; how dark then does it look upon you that remain
   stupidly unawakened! Those who are not moved at such a time as this,
   come to adult age, have reason to fear whether they are not given up to
   judicial hardness. I do not say they have reason to conclude it, but
   they have reason to fear it. How dark doth it look upon you, that God
   comes and knocks at so many persons' doors, and misses yours! that God
   is giving the strivings of his Spirit so generally amongst us, while
   you ar left senseless!

   3. Do you expect to obtain salvation without ever seeking it? If you
   are sensible that there is a necessity of your seeking in order to
   obtaining, and ever intend to seek, one would think you could not avoid
   it at such a time as this. Inquire therefore, whether you intend to go
   to heaven, living all your days a secure, negligent, careless life.-Or,

   4. Do you think you can bear the damnation of hell? Do you imagine that
   you can tolerably endure the devouring fire, and everlasting burnings?
   Do you hope that you shall be able to grapple with the vengeance of God
   Almighty, when he girds himself with strength, and clothes himself with
   wrath? Do you think to strengthen yourself against God, and to be able
   to make your part good with him? I Corinthians 10:22. "Do we provoke
   the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?" Do you flatter yourself
   that you shall find out ways for your ease and support, and to make it
   out tolerably well, to bear up your spirit in those everlasting
   burnings that are prepared for the devil and his angels? Ezekiel 22:14.
   "Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the days that
   I shall deal with thee?"-It is a difficult thing to conceive what such
   Christless persons think, that are unconcerned at such a time.

   III. I would direct myself to them who are grown considerably into
   years, and are yet in a natural condition. I would now take occasion
   earnestly to exhort you to improve this extraordinary opportunity, and
   press into the kingdom of God. You have lost many advantages that once
   you had, and now have not the same advantages that others have. The
   case is very different with you from what it is with many of your
   neighbours. You, above all, had need to improve such an opportunity.
   Now is the time for you to bestir yourself, and take the kingdom of
   heaven!-Consider,

   1. Now there seems to be a door opened for old sinners. Now God is
   dealing forth freely to all sorts: his hand is opened wide, and he does
   not pass by old ones so much as he used to do. You are not under such
   advantages as others who are younger; but yet, so wonderfully has God
   ordered it, that now you are not destitute of great advantage. Though
   old in sin, God has put a new and extraordinary advantage in your
   hands. O! improve this price you have to get wisdom. You that have been
   long seeking to enter in at the strait gate and yet remain without, now
   take your opportunity and press in! You that have been long in the
   wilderness, fighting with various temptations, labouring under
   discouragements, ready to give up the case, and have been often tempted
   to despair, now, behold the door that God opens for you! Do not give
   way to discouragements now; this is not a time for it. Do not spend
   time in thinking, that you have done what you can already, and that you
   are not elected, and in giving way to other perplexing, weakening,
   disheartening temptations. Do not waste away this precious opportunity
   in such a manner. You have no time to spare for such things as these;
   God calls you now to something else. Improve this time in seeking and
   striving for salvation, and not in that which tends to hinder it.-It is
   no time now for you to stand talking with the devil; but hearken to
   God, and apply yourself to that which he does now so loudly call you
   to.
   Some of you have often lamented the loss of past opportunties,
   particularly, the loss of the time of youth, and have been wishing that
   you had so good an opportunity again; and have been ready to say, "O!
   if I was young again, how would I improve such an advantage!" That
   opportunity which you have had in time past is irrecoverable; you can
   never have it again; but God can give you other advantages of another
   sort, that are very great, and he is so doing at this day. He is now
   putting a new opportunity into your hands; though not of the same kind
   with that which you once had, and have lost, yet in some respects as
   great of another kind. If you lament your folly in neglecting and
   losing past opportunties, then do not be guilty of the folly of
   neglecting the opportunity which God now gives you. This opportunity
   you could not have purchased, if you would have given all that you had
   in the world for it. But God is putting it into your hands himself, of
   his own free and sovereign mercy, without your purchasing it. Therefore
   when you have it, do not neglect it.

   2. It is a great deal more likely with respect to such persons than
   others, that this is their last time. There will be a last time of
   special offer of salvation to impenitent sinners-"God's Spirit shall
   not always strive with man," Genesis 6:3. God sometimes continues long
   knocking at the doors of wicked men's hearts; but there are the last
   knocks, and the last calls that ever they shall have. And sometimes
   God's last calls are the loudest; and then if sinners do not hearken,
   he finally leaves them. How long has God been knocking at many of your
   doors that are old in sin! It is a great deal more likely that these
   are his last knocks. You have resisted God's Spirit in times past, and
   have hardened your heart once and again; but God will not be thus dealt
   with always. There is danger, that if now, after so long a time, you
   will not hearken, he will utterly desert you, and leave you to walk in
   your own counsels.

   It seems by God's providence, as though God had yet an elect number
   amongst old sinners in this place, that perhaps he is now about to
   bring in. It looks as though there were some that long lived under Mr.
   Stoddard's ministry, that God has not utterly cast off, though they
   stood it out under such great means as they then enjoyed. It is to be
   hoped that God will now bring in a remnant from among them. But it is
   more likely that God is now about finishing with them, one way or
   other, for their having been so long the subjects of such extraordinary
   means. You have seen former times of the pouring out of God's Spirit
   upon the town, when others were taken and you left, others were called
   out of darkness into marvelous light, and were brought into a glorious
   and happy state, and you saw not good when good came. How dark will
   your circumstances appear, if you shall also stand it out through this
   opportunity, and still be left behind! Take heed that you be not of
   those spoken of, Hebrews 6:7, 8. that are like the "earth that has rain
   coming oft upon it, and only bears briers and thorns." As we see there
   are some pieces of ground, the more showers of rain fall upon them, the
   more fruitful seasons there are, the more do the briers, and other
   useless and hurtful plants, that are rooted in them, grow and flourish.
   Of such ground the apostle says, "It is rejected, and is nigh unto
   cursing, whose end is to be burned." The way that the husbandman takes
   with such ground, is, to set fire to it, to burn up the growth of
   it.-If you miss this opportunity, there is danger that you will be
   utterly rejected, and that your end will be to be burned. And if this
   is to be, it is to be feared, that you are not far from, but nigh unto,
   cursing.

   Those of you that are already grown old in sin, and are now under
   awakenings, when you feel your convictions begin to go off, if ever
   that should be, then remember what you have now been told; it may well
   then strike you to the heart!

   IV. I would direct the advice to those that are young, and now under
   their first special convictions. I would earnestly urge such to improve
   this opportunity, and press into the kingdom of God.-Consider two
   things,

   1. You have all manner of advantages now centering upon you. It is a
   time of great advantage for all; but your advantages are above others.
   There is no other sort of persons that have now so great and happy an
   opportunity as you have.-You have the great advantage that is common to
   all who live in this place, viz. That now it is a time of the
   extraordinary pouring out of the Spirit of God. And have you not that
   great advantage, the awakening influences of the Spirit of God on you
   in particular? and besides, you have this peculiar advantage, that you
   are now in your youth. And added to this, you have another unspeakable
   advantage, that you now are under your first convictions. Happy is he
   that never has hardened his heart, and blocked up his own way to heaven
   by backsliding, and has now the awakening influences of God's Spirit,
   if God does but enable him thoroughly to improve them! Such above all
   in the world bid fair for the kingdom of God. God is wont on such,
   above any kind of persons, as it were easily and readily to bestow the
   saving grace and comforts of his Spirit. Instances of speedy and sudden
   conversion are most commonly found among such. Happy are they that have
   the Spirit of God with them, and never have quenched it, if they did
   but know the price they have in their hands!

   If you have a sense of your necessity of salvation, and the great worth
   and value of it, you will be willing to take the surest way to it, or
   that which has the greatest probability of success; and that certainly
   is, thoroughly to improve your first convictions. If you so go, it is
   not likely that you will fail; there is the greatest probability that
   you will succeed.-What is it not worth, to have such an advantage in
   one's hands for obtaining eternal life? The present season of the
   pouring out of God's Spirit, is the first that many of you who are now
   under awakenings have ever seen, since you came to years of
   understanding. On which account, it is the greatest opportunity that
   ever you had, and probably by far the greatest that ever you will have.
   There are many here present who wish they had such an opportunity, but
   they never can obtain it; they cannot buy it for money; but you have it
   in your possession, and can improve it if you will. But yet,

   2. There is on some accounts greater danger that such as are in your
   circumstances will fail of thoroughly improving their convictions, with
   respect to stedfastness and perseverance, than others. Those that are
   young are more unstable than elder persons. They who never had
   convictions before, have less experience of the difficulty of the work
   they have engaged in; they are more ready to think that they shall
   obtain salvation easily, and are more easily discouraged by
   disappointments; and young persons have less reason and consideration
   to fortify them against temptations to backsliding. You should
   therefore labour now the more to guard against such temptations. By all
   means make but one work of seeking salvation! Make thorough work of it
   the first time! There are vast disadvantages that they bring themselves
   under, who have several turns of seeking with great intermissions. By
   such a course, persons exceedingly wound their own souls, and entangle
   themselves in many snares. Who are those that commonly meet with so
   many difficulties, and are so long labouring in darkness and
   perplexity, but those who have had several turns at seeking salvation;
   who have one while had convictions, and then have quenched them, and
   then have set about the work again, and have backslidden again, and
   have gone on after that manner? The children of Israel would not have
   been forty years in the wilderness, if they had held their courage, and
   had gone on as they set out; but they were of an unstable mind, and
   were for going back again into Egypt.-Otherwise, if they had gone right
   forward without discouragement, as God would have led them, they would
   have soon entered and taken possession of Canaan. They had got to the
   very borders of it when they turned back, but were thirty-eight years
   after that, before they got through the wilderness. Therefore, as you
   regard the interest of your soul, do not run yourself into a like
   difficulty, by unsteadiness, intermission, and backsliding; but press
   right forward, from henceforth, and make but one work of seeking,
   converting, and pardoning grace, however great, and difficult, and long
   a work that may be.
     __________________________________________________________________

Many Mansions
     __________________________________________________________________

A Sermon

  by

Jonathan Edwards

      [Sermon Date: "The Sabbath after the seating of the New Meeting House, Dec
      25, 1737."]
     __________________________________________________________________

    John 14:2 -- In My Father's house are many mansions.

   IN these words may be observed two things,

   1. The thing described, viz., Christ's Father's house. Christ spoke to
   his disciples in the foregoing chapter as one that was about to leave
   them. He told 'em, verse 31, "Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God
   is glorified in him," and then goes to giving of them counsel to live
   in unity and love one another, as one that was going from them. By
   which they seemed somewhat surprised and hardly knew what to make of
   it. And one of them, viz., Peter, asked him where he was going; verse
   36, "Simon Peter said unto him, Lord whither goest thou?" Christ did
   not directly answer and tell him where he was going, but he signifies
   where in these words afterwards, in the verse 12, he tells 'em plainly
   that he was going to his Father.

   2. We may observe the description given of it, viz., that in it there
   are many mansions. The disciples seemed very sorrowful at the news of
   Christ's going away, but Christ comforts 'em with that, that in his
   Father's house where he was going there was not only room for him, but
   room for them too. There were many mansions. There was not only a
   mansion there for him, but there were mansions enough for them all;
   there was room enough in heaven for them. When the disciples perceived
   that Christ was going away, they manifested a great desire to go with
   him, and particularly Peter. Peter in the latter part of the foregoing
   chapter asked him whither he went to that end that he might follow him.
   Christ told him that whither he went he could not follow him now, but
   that he should follow him afterwards. But Peter, not content with
   Christ, seemed to have a great mind to follow him now. "Lord," says he,
   "why cannot I follow thee now?" So that the disciples had a great mind
   still to be with Christ, and Christ in the words of the text intimates
   that they shall be with him. Christ signifies to 'em that he was going
   home to his Father's house, and he encourages 'em that they shall be
   with him there in due time, in that there were many mansions there.
   There was a mansion provided not only for him, but for them all (for
   Judas was not then present), and not only for them, but for all that
   should ever believe in him to the end of the world; and though he went
   before, he only went to prepare a place for them that should follow.

   The text is a plain sentence; 'tis therefore needless to press any
   doctrine in other words from it: so that I shall build my discourse on
   the words of the text. There are two propositions contained in the
   words, viz.,

   I. that heaven is God's house, and

   II. that in this house of God there are many mansions.

   Prop. I. Heaven is God's house. An house of public worship is an house
   where God's people meet from time to time to attend on God's
   ordinances, and that is set apart for that and is called God's house.
   The temple of Solomon was called God's house. God was represented as
   dwelling there. There he has his throne in the holy of holies, even the
   mercy seat over the ark and between the cherubims.

   Sometimes the whole universe is represented in Scripture as God's
   house, built with various stories one above another: Amos 9:6, "It is
   he that buildeth his stories in the heaven;" and Psalm 104:3, "Who
   layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters." But the highest heaven
   is especially represented in Scripture as the house of God. As to other
   parts of the creation, God hath appointed them to inferior uses; but
   this part he has reserved for himself for his own abode. We are told
   that the heavens are the Lord's, but the earth he hath given to the
   sons of men. God, though he is everywhere present, is represented both
   in Old Testament and New as being in heaven is a special and peculiar
   manner. Heaven is the temple of God. Thus we read of God's temple in
   heaven, Revelation 15:5. Solomon's temple was a type of heaven. The
   apostle Paul is his epistle to the Hebrews does from time to time call
   heaven the holy of holies, as being the antitype not only of the temple
   of Solomon, but of the most holy place in that temple, which was the
   place of God's most immediate residence: Hebrews 9:12, "He entered in
   once into the holy place;" verse 24, "For Christ is not entered into
   the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but
   into heaven itself." Houses where assemblies of Christians worship God
   are in some respects figures of this house of God above. When God is
   worshipped in them in spirit and truth, they become the outworks of
   heaven and as it were its gates. As in houses of public worship here
   there are assemblies of Christians meeting to worship God, so in heaven
   there is a glorious assembly, or Church, continually worshipping God:
   Hebrews 12:22,23, "But ye are come unto mount Sion, [and unto] the city
   of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
   company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the firstborn,
   that are written in heaven."

   Heaven is represented in Scripture as God's dwelling-house; Psalm
   113:5, "Who is like [unto] the Lord our God, who dwelleth on high," and
   Psalm 123:1, "Unto thee I lift up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in
   the heavens." Heaven is God's palace. 'Tis the house of the great King
   of the universe; there he has his throne, which is therefore
   represented as his house or temple; Psalm 11:4, "The Lord is in his
   holy temple; the Lord's throne is in heaven."

   Heaven is the house where God dwells with his family. God is
   represented in Scripture as having a family; and though some of this
   family are now on earth, yet in so being they are abroad and not at
   home, but all going home: Ephesians 3:15, "Of whom the whole family in
   heaven and earth is named." Heaven is the place that God has built for
   himself and his children. God has many children, and the place designed
   for them is heaven; therefore the saints, being the children of God,
   are said to be of the household of God, Ephesians 2:19: "Now therefore
   ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the
   saints, and of the household of God." God is represented as a
   householder or head of a family, and heaven is his house.

   Heaven is the house not only where God hath his throne, but also where
   he doth as it were keep his table, where his children sit down with him
   at his table and where they are feasted in a royal manner becoming the
   children of so great a King: Luke 22:30, "That ye may eat and drink at
   my table in my kingdom;" Matthew 26:29, "But I say unto you, I will not
   drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine until that day when I drink
   it new with you in my Father's kingdom."

   God is the King of kings, and heaven is the place where he keeps his
   court. There are his angels and archangels that as the nobles of his
   court do attend upon him.

   Prop. II. There are many mansions in the house of God. By many mansions
   is meant many seats or places of abode. As it is a king's palace, there
   are many mansions. Kings' houses are wont to be built very large, with
   many stately rooms and apartments. So there are many mansions in God's
   house.

   When this is spoken of heaven, it is chiefly to be understood in a
   figurative sense, and the following things seem to be taught us in it.

   1. There is room in this house of God for great numbers. There is room
   in heaven for a vast multitude, yea, room enough for all mankind that
   are or ever shall be; Luke 14:22, "Lord it is done as thou hast
   commanded, and yet there is room."

   It is not with the heavenly temple as it often is with houses of public
   worship in this world, that they fill up and become too small and
   scanty for those that would meet in them, so that there is not
   convenient room for all. There is room enough in our heavenly Father's
   house. This is partly what Christ intended in the words of the text, as
   is evident from the occasion of his speaking them. The disciples
   manifested a great desire to be where Christ was, and Christ therefore,
   to encourage them that it should be as they desired, tells them that in
   his Father's house where he was going were many mansions, i.e., room
   enough for them.

   There is mercy enough in God to admit an innumerable multitude into
   heaven. There is mercy enough for all, and there is merit enough in
   Christ to purchase heavenly happiness for millions of millions, for all
   men that ever were, are or shall be. And there is a sufficiency in the
   fountain of heaven's happiness to supply and fill and satisfy all: and
   there is in all respects enough for the happiness of all.

   2. There are sufficient and suitable accommodations for all the
   different sorts of persons that are in the world: for great and small,
   for high and low, rich and poor, wise and unwise, bond and free,
   persons of all nations and all conditions and circumstances, for those
   that have been great sinners as well as for moral livers; for weak
   saints and those that are babes in Christ as well as for those that are
   stronger and more grown in grace. There is in heaven a sufficiency for
   the happiness of every sort; there is a convenient accommodation for
   every creature that will hearken to the calls of the Gospel. None that
   will come to Christ, let his condition be what it will, need to fear
   but that Christ will provide a place suitable for him in heaven.

   This seems to be another thing implied in Christ's words. The disciples
   were persons of very different condition from Christ: he was their
   Master, and there were his disciples; he was their Lord, and there were
   the servants; he was their Guide, and they were the followers; he was
   their Captain, and they the soldiers; he was the Shepherd, and they the
   sheep; [he was, as it were, the] Father, [and they the] children; he
   was the glorious, holy Son of God, they were the poor, sinful, corrupt
   men. But yet, though they were in such different circumstances from
   him, yet Christ encourages them that there shall not only be room in
   heaven for him, but for them too; for there were many mansions there.
   There was not only a mansion to accommodate the Lord, but the disciples
   also; not only the head, but the members; not only the Son of God, but
   those that are naturally poor, sinful, corrupt men: as in a king's
   palace there is not only a mansion or room of state built for the king
   himself and for his eldest son and heir, but there are many rooms,
   mansions for all his numerous household, children, attendants and
   servants.

   3. It is further implied that heaven is a house that was actually built
   and prepared for a great multitude. When God made heaven in the
   beginning of the world, he intended it for an everlasting
   dwelling-place for a vast and innumerable multitude. When heaven was
   made , it was intended and prepared for all those particular persons
   that God had from eternity designed to save: Matthew 25:34, "Come, ye
   blessed [of my Father, inherit the Kingdom] prepared for you [from the
   foundation of the world]." And that is a very great and innumerable
   multitude: Revelation 7:9, "After this I beheld, and, lo, a great
   multitude which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and
   peoples, and tongues, stood before the throne and before the Lamb,
   clothed with white robes." Heaven being built designedly for these was
   built accordingly; it was built so as most conveniently to accommodate
   all this multitude: as a house that is built for a great family is
   built large and with many rooms in it; as a palace that is built for a
   great king that keeps a great court with many attendants is built
   exceeding great with a great many apartments; and as an house of public
   worship that is built for a great congregation is built very large with
   many seats in it.

   4. When it is said, ["In my father's house are many mansions"], it is
   meant that there are seats of various dignity and different degrees and
   circumstances of honor and happiness. There are many mansions in God's
   house because heaven is intended for various degrees of honor and
   blessedness. Some are designed to sit in higher places there than
   others; some are designed to be advanced to higher degrees of honor and
   glory than others are; and, therefore, there are various mansions, and
   some more honorable mansions and seats, in heaven than others. Though
   they are all seats of exceeding honor and blessedness yet some are more
   so than others.

   Thus a palace is built. Though every part of the palace is magnificent
   as becomes the palace of a king, yet there are many apartments of
   various honor, and some are more stately and costly than others,
   according to the degree of dignity. There is one apartment that is the
   king's presence-chamber; there are other apartments for the next heir
   to the crown; there are others for other children; and others for their
   attendants and the great officers of the household: one for the high
   steward, and another for the chamberlain, and others for meaner
   officers and servants.

   Another image of this was in Solomon's temple. There were many mansions
   of different degrees of honor and dignity. There was the holy of
   holies, where the ark was that was the place of God's immediate
   residence, where the high priest alone might come; and there was
   another apartment called the holy place, where the other priests might
   come; and next to that was the inner court of the temple, where the
   Levites were admitted: and there they had many chambers or mansions
   built for lodging-rooms for the priests; and next to that was the court
   of Israel where the people of Israel might come; and next to that was
   the court of the Gentiles where the Gentiles, those that were called
   the "Proselytes of the Gate," might come.

   And we have an image of this in houses built for the worship of
   Christian assemblies. In such houses of God there are many seats of
   different honor and dignity, from the most honorable to the most
   inferior of the congregation.

   Not that we are to understand the words of Christ so much in a literal
   sense, as that every saint in heaven was to have a certain seat or room
   or place of abode where he was to be locally fixed. 'Tis not the design
   of the Scriptures to inform us much about the external circumstances of
   heaven or the state of heaven locally considered; but we are to
   understand what Christ says chiefly in a spiritual sense. Persons shall
   be set in different degrees of honor and glory in heaven, as is
   abundantly manifested in Scripture: which may fitly be represented to
   our imaginations by there being different seats of honor, as it was in
   the temple, as it is in kings' courts. Some seats shall be nearer the
   throne than others. Some shall sit next to Christ in glory: Matthew
   20:23, "To sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give,
   but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father."

   Christ has doubtless respect to these different degrees of glory in the
   text. When he was going to heaven and the disciples were sorrowful at
   the thoughts of parting with their Lord, he lets them know that there
   are seats or mansions of various degrees of honor in his Father's
   house, that there was not only one for him, who was the Head of the
   Church and the elder brother, but also for them that were his disciples
   and younger brethren.

   Christ also may probably have respect not only to different degrees of
   glory in heaven, but different circumstances. Though the employment and
   happiness of all the heavenly assembly shall in the general be the
   same, yet 'tis not improbable that there may be circumstantial
   difference. We know what their employment [is] in general, but not in
   particular. We know not how one may be employed to subserve and promote
   the happiness of another, and all to help one another. Some may there
   be set in one place for one office or employment, and others [in]
   another, as 'tis in the Church on earth. God hath set every one in the
   body as it hath pleased him; one is the eye, another the ear, another
   the head, etc. But because God has not been pleased expressly to reveal
   how it shall be in this respect, therefore I shall not insist upon it,
   but pass to make some

IMPROVEMENT of what has been offered.

   I. Here is encouragement for sinners that are concerned and exercised
   for the salvation of their souls, such as are afraid that they shall
   never go to heaven or be admitted to any place of abode there, and are
   sensible that they are hitherto in a doleful state and condition in
   that they are out of Christ, and so have no right to any inheritance in
   heaven, but are in danger of going to hell and having their place of
   eternal abode fixed there. You may be encouraged by what has been said,
   earnestly to seek heaven; for there are many mansions there. There is
   room enough there. Let your case be what it will, there is suitable
   provision there for you; and if you come to Christ, you need not fear
   that he will prepare a place for you; he'll see to it that you shall be
   well accommodated in heaven.

   But II. I would improve this doctrine in a twofold exhortation.

   1. Let all be hence exhorted earnestly to seek that they may be
   admitted to a mansion in heaven. You have heard that this is God's
   house; it is his temple. If David, when he was in the wilderness of
   Judah and in the land of Geshur and of the Philistines, so longed that
   he might again return into the land of Israel that he might have a
   place in the house of God here on earth, and prized a place there so
   much, though it was but that of a door-keeper, how great a happiness
   will it be to have a place in this heavenly temple of God! If they are
   looked upon as enjoying a high privilege that have a seat appointed
   them in kings' courts or in apartments in kings' palaces, especially
   those that have an abode there in the quality of the king's children,
   then how great a privilege will it be to have an apartment or mansion
   assigned to us in God's heavenly palace, and to have a place there as
   his children! How great is their glory and honor that are admitted to
   be of the household of God!

   And seeing there are many mansions there, mansions enough for us all,
   our folly will be the greater if we neglect to seek a place in heaven,
   having our minds foolishly taken up about the worthless, fading things
   of this world. Here consider three things:

   (1) How little a while you can have any mansion or place of abode in
   this world. Now you have a dwelling amongst the living. You have a
   house or mansion of your own, or at least one that is at present for
   your use, and now you have a seat in the house of God; but how little a
   while will this continue! In a very little while, and the place that
   now knows you in this world will know you no more. The habitation you
   have here will be empty of you; you will be carried dead out of it, or
   shall die at a distance from it, and never enter into it any more, or
   into any other abode in this world. Your mansion or place of abode in
   this world, however convenient or commodious it may be, is but as a
   tent that shall soon be taken down, but a lodge in a garden of
   cucumbers. Your stay is as it were but for a night. Your body itself is
   but a house of clay which will quickly moulder and tumble down, and you
   shall have no other habitation here in this world but the grave.

   Thus God in his providence is putting you in mind by the repeated
   instances of death that have been in the town within the two weeks
   past, both in one house: in which death he has shown his dominion over
   old and young. The son was taken away first before the father, being in
   his full strength and flower of his days; and the father, who was then
   well and having no appearance of approaching death, followed in a few
   days: and their habitation and their seat in the house of God in this
   world will know them no more.

   Take warning by these warnings of Providence to improve your time that
   you may have a mansion in heaven. We have a house of worship newly
   created amongst us which now you have a seat in, and probably are
   pleased with the ornaments of it; and though you have a place in so
   comely a house, yet you know not how little a while you shall have a
   place in this house of God. Here are a couple snatched away by death
   that had met in it but a few times, that have been snatched out of it
   before it was fully finished and never will have any more a seat in it.
   You know not how soon you may follow, and then of great importance will
   it be to you to have a seat in God's house above. Both of the persons
   lately deceased were much on their death-beds warning others to improve
   their precious time. The first of them was much in expressing his sense
   of the vast importance of an interest in Christ, as I was a witness,
   and was earnest in calling on others to improve their time, to be
   thorough, to get an interest in Christ, and seemed very desirous that
   young people might receive council and warning from him, as the words
   of a dying man, to do their utmost to make sure of conversion; and a
   little before he died left a request to me that I would warn the young
   people in his room. God had been warning of you in his death and the
   death of his father that so soon followed. The words of dying persons
   should be of special weight with us, for then they are in circumstances
   wherein they are most capable to look on things as they are and judge
   aright of 'em,--between both worlds as it were. Still that we must all
   be in.

   Let our young people, therefore, take warning from hence, and don't be
   such fools as to neglect seeking a place and mansion in heaven. Young
   persons are especially apt to be taken with the pleasing things of this
   world. You are now, it may be, much pleased with hopes of your future
   circumstances in this world; [and you are now, it may be, much] pleased
   with the ornaments of that house of worship that you with others have a
   place in. But, alas, do you not too little consider how soon you may be
   taken away from all these things, and no more forever have any part in
   any mansion or house or enjoyment or happiness under the sun? Therefore
   let it be your main care to secure an everlasting habitation for
   hereafter.

   (2) Consider when you die, if you have no mansion in the house of God
   in heaven, you must have your place of abode in the habitation of
   devils. There is no middle place between them, and when you go hence,
   you must go to one or the other of these. Some have a mansion prepared
   for them in heaven from the foundation [of the world]; others are sent
   away as cursed into everlasting burnings prepared for the [devil and
   his angels]. Consider how miserable those must be that shall have their
   habitation with devils to all eternity. Devils are foul spirits; God's
   great enemies. Their habitation is the blackness of darkness; a place
   of the utmost filthiness, abomination, darkness, disgrace and torment,
   O, how would you rather ten thousand times have no place of abode at
   all, have no being, than to have a place [with devils]!

   (3) If you die unconverted, you will have the worse place in hell for
   having had a seat or place in God's house in this world. As there are
   many mansions, places of different degrees of honor in heaven, so there
   are various abodes and places or degrees of torment and misery in hell;
   and those will have the worst place there that [dying unconverted, have
   had the best place in God's house here]. Solomon speaks of a peculiarly
   awful sight that he had seen, that of a wicked man buried that had gone
   [from the place of the holy], Ecclesiastes 8:10. Such as have had a
   seat in God's house, have been in a sense exalted up to heaven, set on
   the gate of heaven, [if they die unconverted, shall be] cast down to
   hell.

   2. The second exhortation that I would offer from what has been said is
   to seek a high place in heaven. Seeing there are many mansions of
   different degrees of honor and dignity in heaven, let us seek to obtain
   a mansion of distinguished glory. 'Tis revealed to us that there are
   different degrees of glory to that end that we might seek after the
   higher degrees. God offered high degrees of glory to that end, that we
   might seek them by eminent holiness and good works: 2 Corinthians 9:6,
   "He that sows sparingly [shall reap also sparingly; and he that soweth
   bountifully shall reap also bountifully]." It is not becoming persons
   to be over anxious about an high seat in God's house in this world, for
   that is the honor that is of men; but we can't too earnestly seek after
   an high seat in God's house above, by seeking eminent holiness, for
   that is the honor that is of God.

   'Tis very little worth the while for us to pursue after honor in this
   world, where the greatest honor is but a bubble and will soon vanish
   away, and death will level all. Some have more stately houses than
   others, and some are in higher office than others, and some are richer
   than others and have higher seats in the meeting-house than others; but
   all graves are upon a level. One rotting, putrefying corpse is as
   ignoble as another; the worms are as bold with one carcass as another.

   But the mansions in God's house above are everlasting mansions. Those
   that have seats allotted 'em there, whether of greater or lesser
   dignity, whether nearer or further from the throne, will hold 'em to
   all eternity. This is promised, Revelation 3:12 :"Him that overcometh I
   will make him a pillar in the temple [of my God, and he shall go no
   more out]." If it be worth the while to desire and seek high seats in
   the meeting-house, where you are one day in a week, and where you shall
   never come but few days in all; if it be worth the while much to prize
   one seat above another in the house of worship only because it is the
   pew or seat that is ranked first in number, and to be seen here for a
   few days, how will it be worth the while to seek an high mansion in
   God's temple and in that glorious place that is the everlasting
   habitation of God and all his children! You that are pleased with your
   seats in this house because you are seated high or in a place that is
   looked upon honorable by those that sit round about, and because many
   can behold you, consider how short a time you will enjoy this pleasure.
   And if there be any that are not suited in their seats because they are
   too low for them, let them consider that it is but a very little while
   before it will [be] all one to you whether you have sat high or low
   here. But it will be of infinite and everlasting concern to you where
   your seat is in another world. Let your great concern be while in this
   world so to improve your opportunities in God's house in this world,
   whether you sit high or low, as that you may have a distinguished and
   glorious mansion in God's house in heaven, where you may be fixed in
   your place in that glorious assembly in an everlasting rest.

   Let the main thing that we prize in God's house be, not the outward
   ornaments of it, or a high seat in it, but the word of God and his
   ordinances in it. And spend your time here in seeking Christ, that he
   may prepare a place for you in his Father's house, that when he comes
   again to this world, he may take you to himself, that where he is,
   there you may be also.

      [From Selected Sermons of Jonathan Edwards, edited with introduction and
      notes by H. Horman Gardiner, New York, The Macmillan Company, 1904.]
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [48]1:28   [49]1:29   [50]4:3   [51]4:3   [52]6:3   [53]6:22
   [54]6:22   [55]7:16   [56]7:21   [57]7:23   [58]39:9   [59]49:9

   Exodus

   [60]5:2   [61]9:15-16   [62]22:28   [63]28:3   [64]32:34   [65]34:7

   Leviticus

   [66]12:8

   Numbers

   [67]14:2   [68]14:21-23   [69]24:17

   Deuteronomy

   [70]7:7   [71]7:8   [72]7:10   [73]9:6   [74]22:35   [75]29:18-19
   [76]32   [77]32:22   [78]32:35   [79]32:35   [80]32:39

   Judges

   [81]9:13   [82]10:14   [83]14:14

   1 Samuel

   [84]2:25   [85]5:1-4   [86]12:20

   2 Samuel

   [87]15:26   [88]16:10

   1 Chronicles

   [89]16

   2 Chronicles

   [90]18:22

   Nehemiah

   [91]4:3

   Job

   [92]1:7   [93]9:8   [94]10:6-7   [95]11:8   [96]15:4   [97]15:4
   [98]21:4   [99]22:2   [100]27:10   [101]27:10   [102]27:20

   Psalms

   [103]1:21   [104]5:4   [105]11:4   [106]14:1   [107]14:13
   [108]15:16   [109]16:11   [110]18:25-26   [111]19:96   [112]19:100
   [113]21:6   [114]22:8   [115]22:14   [116]25:4-5   [117]25:11
   [118]25:11   [119]25:14   [120]27:4   [121]36:1   [122]36:2
   [123]36:2   [124]36:8-9   [125]37:11   [126]45:3   [127]49:5
   [128]49:11   [129]49:17-18   [130]51:4   [131]56:3-4   [132]63:1
   [133]66:3   [134]72:7   [135]73:18   [136]73:18-19   [137]78:8
   [138]80:8   [139]85:10   [140]90:1   [141]94:6-7   [142]104:3
   [143]107:29   [144]110:3   [145]113:5   [146]115:1   [147]115:3
   [148]115:7   [149]119:18   [150]119:96   [151]119:100   [152]122:8
   [153]123:1   [154]139:8   [155]143:6   [156]147:19-20

   Proverbs

   [157]1:17   [158]1:24   [159]1:25-26   [160]2   [161]2:6   [162]2:6
   [163]2:10   [164]2:10   [165]6:34   [166]8:4   [167]8:4   [168]8:30
   [169]9   [170]10:19   [171]10:19   [172]11:1   [173]14:23
   [174]14:23   [175]16:4   [176]16:17   [177]20:2   [178]23:32
   [179]25:2   [180]25:2   [181]29:1   [182]30:4   [183]30:17

   Ecclesiastes

   [184]2:16   [185]8:10   [186]9:10   [187]10:10

   Song of Solomon

   [188]2:15   [189]5:1   [190]8:1

   Isaiah

   [191]2:4   [192]5   [193]5   [194]6:10   [195]9:6   [196]9:6
   [197]11:6   [198]26:11   [199]31:4   [200]32:2   [201]32:2
   [202]33:12-14   [203]34:16   [204]34:16   [205]35:8   [206]42:21
   [207]43:22   [208]45:9   [209]53:2   [210]53:2   [211]53:7
   [212]53:10   [213]53:10-12   [214]54:1   [215]55:1-2   [216]55:1-3
   [217]55:6   [218]57:1-2   [219]57:20   [220]59:18   [221]63:3
   [222]64:5   [223]66:7-8   [224]66:15   [225]66:23-24   [226]66:24

   Jeremiah

   [227]2:2   [228]2:23   [229]7:25   [230]7:25   [231]17:6   [232]23:6
   [233]23:28-29   [234]32:40   [235]33:6   [236]36:2

   Ezekiel

   [237]8:18   [238]11:19-20   [239]14:4   [240]14:7   [241]14:8
   [242]15:2-4   [243]15:2-4   [244]16:63   [245]22:14   [246]22:14
   [247]22:14   [248]33:11

   Daniel

   [249]4:34-35   [250]7:13-14

   Hosea

   [251]10:1   [252]10:1

   Amos

   [253]4:13   [254]9:6

   Jonah

   [255]3:8-9

   Micah

   [256]4:3

   Nahum

   [257]1:3

   Zechariah

   [258]3:10   [259]7:5-6

   Malachi

   [260]1:2-3   [261]4:2

   Matthew

   [262]3:7   [263]3:9   [264]3:10   [265]3:12   [266]4:17   [267]5:5
   [268]5:8   [269]5:44   [270]6:6   [271]7:11   [272]7:14   [273]8:3
   [274]8:32   [275]9:12   [276]9:13   [277]9:28   [278]10:7
   [279]10:22   [280]11:11   [281]11:12   [282]11:12   [283]11:25-26
   [284]11:25-27   [285]11:29   [286]11:29   [287]12:36   [288]12:36
   [289]13:30   [290]14:27   [291]15:22   [292]16:17   [293]16:17
   [294]16:21   [295]19:14   [296]19:28-29   [297]20:15   [298]20:15
   [299]20:22   [300]20:23   [301]21:4   [302]21:31   [303]21:44
   [304]22:30   [305]23:13   [306]24:36   [307]24:36   [308]25:11
   [309]25:21   [310]25:23   [311]25:34   [312]26:29   [313]26:29
   [314]26:29   [315]26:37   [316]26:38   [317]26:39   [318]26:39
   [319]26:41   [320]26:41   [321]26:41   [322]26:42   [323]26:51
   [324]27:43   [325]27:43

   Mark

   [326]7:18-20   [327]10:15   [328]10:17   [329]12:25   [330]13:32
   [331]14:33   [332]14:39   [333]16:15-16

   Luke

   [334]1:17   [335]1:35   [336]1:36   [337]2:24   [338]3:12   [339]6:5
   [340]6:12   [341]8   [342]9:23   [343]9:43   [344]10:23-24
   [345]10:23-24   [346]10:42   [347]11:12   [348]11:21-22   [349]12:4-5
   [350]12:50   [351]12:56-57   [352]13:7   [353]13:7   [354]13:7
   [355]13:24   [356]13:24   [357]13:24   [358]14:22   [359]15
   [360]16:16   [361]16:16   [362]16:22   [363]18   [364]18   [365]18:9
   [366]18:11   [367]19:41-42   [368]19:44   [369]21:36   [370]22:30
   [371]22:30   [372]22:41   [373]22:44   [374]22:44   [375]22:53
   [376]22:53   [377]23:25   [378]23:31   [379]23:34   [380]24:49

   John

   [381]1:11   [382]2:11   [383]2:19   [384]3:18   [385]3:18   [386]3:30
   [387]4:14   [388]4:23   [389]5:17   [390]5:23   [391]5:39   [392]5:39
   [393]6:37   [394]6:37   [395]6:40   [396]7:17   [397]7:17
   [398]7:38-39   [399]8:23   [400]8:28   [401]8:31   [402]8:33
   [403]10:9   [404]10:18   [405]11:42   [406]12:27-28   [407]12:34
   [408]12:44-46   [409]14:2   [410]14:2   [411]14:6   [412]14:19
   [413]14:31   [414]15:6   [415]15:10   [416]15:11   [417]15:12
   [418]15:15   [419]17:1   [420]17:3   [421]17:5   [422]17:6-8
   [423]17:13   [424]17:13   [425]17:21   [426]17:22-23   [427]17:23
   [428]17:24   [429]17:24   [430]18:3   [431]18:11   [432]18:18
   [433]19:15   [434]20:16-17   [435]20:17   [436]20:17

   Acts

   [437]2:13   [438]2:23   [439]2:36   [440]2:37   [441]2:41   [442]7:55
   [443]8:22   [444]10:2   [445]13:39   [446]17:11   [447]17:11
   [448]24:25

   Romans

   [449]2:4   [450]2:4-5   [451]3:19   [452]3:19   [453]3:25
   [454]3:25-26   [455]3:25-26   [456]3:25-26   [457]4:20   [458]5:10
   [459]7:18   [460]8   [461]8:1   [462]8:17   [463]8:17   [464]8:20
   [465]8:20-22   [466]8:26   [467]9:18   [468]9:18   [469]9:20
   [470]9:22   [471]9:22   [472]9:22-23   [473]10:2   [474]10:6-8
   [475]10:14   [476]10:14   [477]11:17   [478]11:22   [479]11:36
   [480]12:2   [481]12:12   [482]13:14   [483]15:30

   1 Corinthians

   [484]1:4-5   [485]1:26-27   [486]1:26-28   [487]1:28   [488]1:29-31
   [489]1:29-31   [490]1:29-31   [491]3:18   [492]3:18   [493]3:21-23
   [494]4:3   [495]5:7   [496]6:2   [497]6:10   [498]8:1   [499]8:1
   [500]8:6   [501]8:6   [502]9:26   [503]10:12   [504]10:22
   [505]10:22   [506]12:28   [507]12:28   [508]13:12   [509]13:12
   [510]14:2   [511]14:2-6   [512]14:6   [513]14:33   [514]15:13

   2 Corinthians

   [515]1:22   [516]3:18   [517]4:4   [518]4:6   [519]4:7   [520]5:3
   [521]5:8   [522]5:17   [523]9:6   [524]12:2   [525]12:2-4   [526]12:15

   Galatians

   [527]1:15-16   [528]3:13   [529]3:13-14   [530]3:27   [531]4:4
   [532]4:4-6   [533]4:19   [534]5:24

   Ephesians

   [535]1:10   [536]1:13-14   [537]1:19   [538]1:33   [539]2:5-6
   [540]2:8   [541]2:10   [542]2:13   [543]2:18   [544]2:19   [545]2:19
   [546]3:14-15   [547]3:15   [548]4:9-10   [549]4:11-12   [550]4:11-12
   [551]4:24   [552]5:12   [553]6:18   [554]6:18-19

   Philippians

   [555]1:9   [556]1:9   [557]2:6   [558]2:8   [559]2:8-9   [560]2:12
   [561]3:6   [562]3:11   [563]3:13   [564]3:14   [565]3:20

   Colossians

   [566]1:16   [567]1:20   [568]1:23   [569]2:12-13   [570]2:14-15
   [571]3:11   [572]3:11   [573]4:2   [574]4:12

   1 Thessalonians

   [575]5:3   [576]5:6   [577]5:17

   1 Timothy

   [578]1:13

   2 Timothy

   [579]2:12   [580]2:20   [581]2:25

   Titus

   [582]3:5

   Hebrews

   [583]1   [584]1:1   [585]1:8   [586]2:3   [587]3:12-14   [588]3:14
   [589]4:1   [590]5:6-7   [591]5:7   [592]5:8   [593]5:12   [594]5:12
   [595]5:12   [596]5:12   [597]6   [598]6   [599]6:7-8   [600]6:7-8
   [601]6:13   [602]7:27   [603]9:12   [604]10:32   [605]10:38-39
   [606]11:7   [607]11:7   [608]11:13   [609]11:39-40   [610]12:2
   [611]12:10   [612]12:14   [613]12:22-23   [614]12:22-24

   James

   [615]1:5   [616]1:5   [617]2:5   [618]5:16   [619]5:18

   1 Peter

   [620]1:4   [621]1:5   [622]1:8   [623]1:10   [624]1:10-12
   [625]1:11-12   [626]1:12   [627]1:12   [628]1:12   [629]2:16
   [630]2:20   [631]2:23   [632]3:19-20   [633]3:20   [634]3:20
   [635]4:7   [636]4:7

   2 Peter

   [637]3:17

   1 John

   [638]1:7   [639]3:3   [640]3:6

   3 John

   [641]1:11

   Jude

   [642]1:19

   Revelation

   [643]1:3   [644]1:3   [645]1:17-18   [646]2:7   [647]2:10
   [648]2:26-27   [649]3:11   [650]3:12   [651]3:12   [652]3:17
   [653]3:20   [654]3:21   [655]3:21   [656]3:21   [657]4   [658]5:1
   [659]5:5   [660]5:5-6   [661]5:5-6   [662]5:6   [663]5:9
   [664]5:9-12   [665]5:10   [666]7:1-3   [667]7:9   [668]7:17
   [669]7:17   [670]14:1   [671]14:10   [672]15:2-3   [673]15:5
   [674]16:5   [675]18:20   [676]19   [677]19:1-2   [678]19:5
   [679]19:7   [680]19:15   [681]20:4   [682]20:11   [683]21:23
   [684]22:1   [685]22:3   [686]22:16   [687]22:16-17
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   Genesis

   [688]6:22

   Deuteronomy

   [689]32:35

   Job

   [690]27:10

   Psalms

   [691]25:11   [692]36:2

   Isaiah

   [693]32:2

   Ezekiel

   [694]15:2-4   [695]22:14

   Matthew

   [696]16:17

   Luke

   [697]16:16   [698]22:44   [699]22:44

   John

   [700]14:2

   Romans

   [701]3:19   [702]9:18

   1 Corinthians

   [703]1:29-31

   2 Corinthians

   [704]5:8

   Hebrews

   [705]5:12   [706]5:12

   Revelation

   [707]5:5-6
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.sinners.html
   2. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Sinners_in_the%20Hands_of_an_Angry_God.mp3
   3. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.supernatural_light.html
   4. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Divine_and_Supernatural_Light.mp3
   5. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.agony.html
   6. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Christ's%20Agony.mp3
   7. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.gssm.html
   8. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/God's%20Sovereignty.mp3
   9. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.dependence.html
  10. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/God_Glorified_in_Mans_Dependence.mp3
  11. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.absent_body.html
  12. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Absent_from_the_Body.mp3
  13. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.divineTruth.html
  14. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Importance_of_Knowledge.mp3
  15. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.excellency.html
  16. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Excellency_of_Christ.mp3
  17. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.destruction.html
  18. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.flatteries.html
  19. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Vain_Self-Flatteries.mp3
  20. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.future.html
  21. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.hypocrites.html
  22. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Duty_of_Prayer.mp3
  23. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.justice.html
  24. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Justice_in_Damnation.mp3
  25. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.knowledge.html
  26. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Christian_Knowledge.mp3
  27. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.manner.html
  28. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Salvation_to_be_Sought.mp3
  29. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.safety.html
  30. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Safety_Fulness_and_Sweet_Refreshment.mp3
  31. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.pardon.html
  32. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Pardon_for_the_Greatest_Sinners.mp3
  33. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.pressing.html
  34. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Pressing_Into_the_Kingdom.mp3
  35. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons.mansions.html
  36. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/mp3/Many_Mansions.mp3
  37. file://localhost/ccel/edwards/sermons/files/outline.html
  38. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3#gssm-p9.1
  39. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3#gssm-p15.1
  40. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3#gssm-p26.1
  41. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3#gssm-p35.1
  42. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3#excellency-p10.7
  43. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3#excellency-p47.2
  44. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3#excellency-p91.2
  45. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3#excellency-p23.1
  46. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3#excellency-p23.2
  47. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3#excellency-p43.4
  48. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#destruction-p47.2
  49. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=29#destruction-p47.3
  50. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=3#manner-p6.1
  51. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=3#manner-p43.1
  52. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=3#pressing-p74.1
  53. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=22#i-p30.1
  54. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=22#manner-p0.4
  55. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=16#manner-p43.3
  56. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=21#manner-p34.1
  57. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=23#manner-p34.1
  58. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=9#justice-p12.2
  59. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=9#excellency-p5.1
  60. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=5&scrV=2#justice-p50.1
  61. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=9&scrV=15#destruction-p31.3
  62. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=22&scrV=28#gssm-p4.4
  63. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=28&scrV=3#supernatural_light-p8.1
  64. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=34#pressing-p45.2
  65. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=7#future-p24.3
  66. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=12&scrV=8#excellency-p50.2
  67. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=2#future-p12.1
  68. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=21#destruction-p59.2
  69. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=24&scrV=17#excellency-p93.2
  70. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=7#gssm-p28.2
  71. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=8#gssm-p28.4
  72. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=10#future-p24.2
  73. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=9&scrV=6#gssm-p28.3
  74. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=22&scrV=35#future-p11.1
  75. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=29&scrV=18#flatteries-p9.1
  76. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=0#future-p24.1
  77. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=22#manner-p34.2
  78. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=35#i-p2.1
  79. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=35#sinners-p1.1
  80. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=39#gssm-p39.1
  81. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=9&scrV=13#destruction-p4.1
  82. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=10&scrV=14#justice-p49.1
  83. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=14&scrV=14#excellency-p85.2
  84. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=25#justice-p12.1
  85. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=5&scrV=1#excellency-p85.3
  86. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=20#justice-p104.1
  87. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=26#agony-p58.1
  88. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=10#gssm-p4.3
  89. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=16&scrV=0#hypocrites-p48.1
  90. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=18&scrV=22#gssm-p4.2
  91. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=4&scrV=3#justice-p90.2
  92. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=7#justice-p90.1
  93. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=8#excellency-p58.1
  94. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=10&scrV=6#hypocrites-p61.2
  95. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=11&scrV=8#excellency-p17.2
  96. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=15&scrV=4#hypocrites-p16.1
  97. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=15&scrV=4#hypocrites-p39.1
  98. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=21&scrV=4#future-p14.1
  99. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=22&scrV=2#destruction-p57.1
 100. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=27&scrV=10#i-p24.1
 101. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=27&scrV=10#hypocrites-p0.4
 102. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=27&scrV=20#manner-p47.2
 103. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=21#flatteries-p10.2
 104. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=4#destruction-p28.2
 105. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=4#mansions-p10.3
 106. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=1#flatteries-p15.1
 107. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=13#absent_body-p25.4
 108. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=16#destruction-p47.1
 109. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#absent_body-p25.1
 110. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=25#justice-p40.1
 111. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=96#knowledge-p46.1
 112. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=100#knowledge-p75.1
 113. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=21&scrV=6#absent_body-p25.2
 114. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=8#absent_body-p20.2
 115. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=14#excellency-p71.1
 116. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=4#hypocrites-p53.1
 117. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=11#i-p34.1
 118. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=11#pardon-p1.2
 119. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=14#supernatural_light-p41.5
 120. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=4#pressing-p12.2
 121. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=1#hypocrites-p39.2
 122. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=2#i-p20.1
 123. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=2#flatteries-p0.4
 124. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=8#absent_body-p25.10
 125. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=11#absent_body-p32.7
 126. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=3#excellency-p29.1
 127. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=5#absent_body-p32.16
 128. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=11#flatteries-p17.1
 129. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=17#flatteries-p10.1
 130. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=4#justice-p12.3
 131. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=3#safety-p34.1
 132. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=1#safety-p37.1
 133. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=3#justice-p45.1
 134. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=72&scrV=7#absent_body-p32.8
 135. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=18#sinners-p3.1
 136. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=18#sinners-p4.1
 137. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=8#hypocrites-p53.2
 138. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=8#destruction-p1.1
 139. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=10#excellency-p44.1
 140. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=1#safety-p87.1
 141. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=6#flatteries-p15.2
 142. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=3#mansions-p9.2
 143. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=107&scrV=29#excellency-p58.3
 144. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=3#justice-p66.1
 145. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=5#mansions-p10.1
 146. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=1#dependence.2-p39.2
 147. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=3#gssm-p39.2
 148. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=7#excellency-p58.2
 149. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=18#supernatural_light-p41.4
 150. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=96#divineTruth-p56.1
 151. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=100#divineTruth-p84.1
 152. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=122&scrV=8#excellency-p102.2
 153. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=123&scrV=1#mansions-p10.2
 154. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=8#excellency-p58.4
 155. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=6#safety-p37.2
 156. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=19#gssm-p28.1
 157. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=17#flatteries-p42.1
 158. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=24#justice-p50.2
 159. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=25#sinners-p31.2
 160. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=2&scrV=0#pressing-p15.2
 161. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=2&scrV=6#divineTruth-p83.2
 162. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=2&scrV=6#knowledge-p74.2
 163. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=2&scrV=10#divineTruth-p71.1
 164. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=2&scrV=10#knowledge-p62.1
 165. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=34#pressing-p45.1
 166. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=4#excellency-p98.1
 167. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=4#pardon-p16.1
 168. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=30#absent_body-p25.8
 169. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=9&scrV=0#excellency-p98.3
 170. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=19#divineTruth-p69.1
 171. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=19#knowledge-p58.1
 172. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=11&scrV=1#destruction-p59.1
 173. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=23#divineTruth-p69.2
 174. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=23#knowledge-p59.1
 175. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=4#destruction-p29.2
 176. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=17#hypocrites-p40.3
 177. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=2#sinners-p29.1
 178. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=32#flatteries-p3.1
 179. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=25&scrV=2#divineTruth-p70.3
 180. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=25&scrV=2#knowledge-p61.3
 181. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=29&scrV=1#manner-p47.3
 182. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=4#excellency-p17.1
 183. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=17#justice-p30.1
 184. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=2&scrV=16#sinners-p16.1
 185. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=8&scrV=10#mansions-p38.1
 186. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=9&scrV=10#pressing-p24.1
 187. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=10&scrV=10#pressing-p15.1
 188. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=15#destruction-p1.2
 189. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=1#excellency-p109.1
 190. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=1#excellency-p102.1
 191. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=4#absent_body-p32.10
 192. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=0#destruction-p1.3
 193. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=0#destruction-p53.1
 194. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=10#gssm-p4.1
 195. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#excellency-p92.1
 196. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#excellency-p96.1
 197. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=6#absent_body-p32.12
 198. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=11#future-p17.1
 199. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=31&scrV=4#excellency-p99.1
 200. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=32&scrV=2#i-p32.1
 201. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=32&scrV=2#safety-p0.4
 202. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=12#sinners-p33.2
 203. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=16#divineTruth-p52.2
 204. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=16#knowledge-p42.2
 205. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=8#hypocrites-p40.4
 206. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=21#gssm-p20.1
 207. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=22#hypocrites-p48.2
 208. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=9#justice-p57.1
 209. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=2#agony-p2.1
 210. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=2#excellency-p93.4
 211. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=7#excellency-p62.1
 212. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=10#excellency-p81.1
 213. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=10#absent_body-p32.1
 214. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=1#gssm-p29.4
 215. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=1#safety-p48.1
 216. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=1#excellency-p98.2
 217. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=6#pressing-p46.1
 218. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=1#absent_body-p32.17
 219. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=20#sinners-p14.1
 220. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=18#sinners-p30.1
 221. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=3#sinners-p32.1
 222. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=5#hypocrites-p51.1
 223. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=7#pressing-p52.1
 224. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=15#sinners-p30.2
 225. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=23#sinners-p34.1
 226. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=24#destruction-p32.2
 227. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=2#destruction-p1.4
 228. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=23#pressing-p38.1
 229. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=25#divineTruth-p50.1
 230. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=25#knowledge-p40.1
 231. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=6#pressing-p64.2
 232. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=6#dependence.2-p25.1
 233. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=28#supernatural_light-p47.1
 234. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=40#hypocrites-p26.1
 235. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=33&scrV=6#absent_body-p32.9
 236. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=36&scrV=2#excellency-p2.2
 237. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=8&scrV=18#sinners-p31.1
 238. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=11&scrV=19#hypocrites-p56.1
 239. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=4#future-p52.1
 240. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=7#future-p52.1
 241. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=8#future-p52.1
 242. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=15&scrV=2#i-p18.1
 243. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=15&scrV=2#destruction-p0.4
 244. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=63#justice-p106.1
 245. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=22&scrV=14#i-p22.1
 246. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=22&scrV=14#future-p0.5
 247. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=22&scrV=14#pressing-p71.2
 248. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=11#destruction-p40.1
 249. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=34#gssm-p39.3
 250. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=13#absent_body-p32.4
 251. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=10&scrV=1#destruction-p1.5
 252. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=10&scrV=1#destruction-p42.1
 253. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=4&scrV=13#excellency-p58.5
 254. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=9&scrV=6#mansions-p9.1
 255. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=3&scrV=8#pressing-p26.3
 256. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=4&scrV=3#absent_body-p32.11
 257. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Nah&scrCh=1&scrV=3#future-p24.4
 258. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=10#hypocrites-p20.1
 259. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=7&scrV=5#destruction-p42.5
 260. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=2#gssm-p29.1
 261. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#excellency-p93.1
 262. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=7#pressing-p5.1
 263. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=9#flatteries-p47.1
 264. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=10#destruction-p60.1
 265. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=12#destruction-p61.1
 266. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=17#pressing-p2.1
 267. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=5#absent_body-p32.6
 268. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#absent_body-p15.3
 269. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=44#agony-p85.1
 270. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=6#hypocrites-p22.3
 271. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#dependence.2-p30.1
 272. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=14#pressing-p25.1
 273. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=3#excellency-p39.3
 274. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=32#agony-p87.1
 275. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=12#pardon-p14.2
 276. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#pardon-p14.1
 277. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=28#excellency-p98.4
 278. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=7#pressing-p2.2
 279. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=22#hypocrites-p55.3
 280. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=11#pressing-p3.2
 281. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=12#agony-p86.3
 282. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=12#pressing-p6.1
 283. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#gssm-p39.4
 284. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#supernatural_light-p41.1
 285. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#excellency-p27.1
 286. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#excellency-p30.2
 287. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=36#divineTruth-p69.3
 288. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=36#knowledge-p59.2
 289. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=30#destruction-p60.3
 290. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=27#absent_body-p20.3
 291. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=22#agony-p84.5
 292. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=17#i-p4.1
 293. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=17#supernatural_light-p2.2
 294. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=21#agony-p20.1
 295. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=14#excellency-p18.5
 296. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=28#absent_body-p32.13
 297. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=15#justice-p98.1
 298. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=15#justice-p100.1
 299. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=22#agony-p20.3
 300. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=23#mansions-p26.1
 301. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=4#excellency-p30.1
 302. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=31#gssm-p33.2
 303. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=44#future-p40.1
 304. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=30#absent_body-p12.5
 305. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=13#justice-p92.1
 306. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=36#absent_body-p12.3
 307. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=36#manner-p47.1
 308. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=11#manner-p45.1
 309. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=21#absent_body-p25.6
 310. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=23#absent_body-p25.6
 311. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#mansions-p21.1
 312. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=29#absent_body-p25.11
 313. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=29#excellency-p107.4
 314. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=29#mansions-p12.2
 315. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=37#agony-p24.1
 316. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=38#agony-p25.1
 317. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=39#agony-p18.1
 318. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=39#excellency-p40.1
 319. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=41#agony-p40.1
 320. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=41#agony-p84.1
 321. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=41#hypocrites-p22.1
 322. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=42#agony-p64.1
 323. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=51#agony-p32.1
 324. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=43#agony-p77.1
 325. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=43#excellency-p43.1
 326. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=18#pressing-p37.2
 327. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=15#dependence.2-p39.1
 328. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=17#manner-p15.1
 329. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=25#absent_body-p12.6
 330. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=32#absent_body-p12.4
 331. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=33#agony-p24.2
 332. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=39#agony-p68.1
 333. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=15#pardon-p16.3
 334. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=17#pressing-p3.3
 335. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#excellency-p51.1
 336. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=36#hypocrites-p49.3
 337. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=24#excellency-p50.1
 338. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=12#pressing-p5.2
 339. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=5#agony-p84.4
 340. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=12#agony-p84.2
 341. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=0#excellency-p57.1
 342. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=23#manner-p26.1
 343. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=43#hypocrites-p55.2
 344. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=23#divineTruth-p75.1
 345. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=23#knowledge-p65.1
 346. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=42#pressing-p12.1
 347. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=12#sinners-p13.1
 348. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=21#dependence.2-p22.1
 349. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=4#sinners-p29.2
 350. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=50#agony-p20.2
 351. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=56#supernatural_light-p43.1
 352. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=7#sinners-p9.1
 353. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=7#destruction-p26.3
 354. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=7#destruction-p50.1
 355. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=24#agony-p2.2
 356. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=24#agony-p86.1
 357. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=24#pressing-p25.2
 358. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=22#mansions-p16.1
 359. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=0#justice-p90.3
 360. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=16#i-p36.1
 361. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=16#pressing-p0.4
 362. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=22#excellency-p18.3
 363. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=0#agony-p84.3
 364. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=0#hypocrites-p49.1
 365. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=9#flatteries-p21.1
 366. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=11#gssm-p33.1
 367. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=41#pressing-p55.1
 368. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=44#pressing-p45.3
 369. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=36#hypocrites-p49.2
 370. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=30#excellency-p107.3
 371. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=30#mansions-p12.1
 372. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=41#excellency-p31.1
 373. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=44#i-p6.1
 374. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=44#agony-p0.8
 375. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=53#agony-p42.1
 376. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=53#excellency-p84.1
 377. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=25#manner-p45.2
 378. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=31#agony-p43.1
 379. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#excellency-p82.1
 380. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=49#dependence.2-p30.3
 381. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=11#gssm-p29.2
 382. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=11#excellency-p58.6
 383. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#agony-p20.6
 384. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=18#sinners-p10.1
 385. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=18#justice-p88.1
 386. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=30#pressing-p3.1
 387. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=14#dependence.2-p29.1
 388. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=23#destruction-p42.3
 389. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#excellency-p39.2
 390. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=23#excellency-p26.2
 391. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#divineTruth-p52.1
 392. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#knowledge-p42.1
 393. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=37#justice-p73.1
 394. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=37#pardon-p16.2
 395. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=40#supernatural_light-p42.1
 396. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=17#divineTruth-p84.2
 397. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=17#knowledge-p75.2
 398. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=38#dependence.2-p29.3
 399. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=23#sinners-p10.2
 400. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=28#agony-p20.4
 401. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=31#hypocrites-p54.1
 402. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=33#flatteries-p23.1
 403. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=9#safety-p55.3
 404. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#excellency-p37.3
 405. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=42#agony-p96.1
 406. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=27#agony-p71.1
 407. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=34#agony-p20.5
 408. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=44#supernatural_light-p42.3
 409. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=2#i-p38.1
 410. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=2#mansions-p0.10
 411. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#safety-p55.1
 412. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=19#supernatural_light-p40.3
 413. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=31#excellency-p37.1
 414. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=6#destruction-p58.1
 415. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=10#excellency-p37.2
 416. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=11#absent_body-p25.7
 417. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=12#agony-p104.1
 418. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=15#absent_body-p20.1
 419. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=1#absent_body-p36.3
 420. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#supernatural_light-p40.4
 421. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=5#absent_body-p25.9
 422. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=6#supernatural_light-p42.2
 423. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=13#excellency-p107.2
 424. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=13#excellency-p111.2
 425. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=21#excellency-p113.1
 426. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=22#excellency-p106.1
 427. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=23#excellency-p111.1
 428. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#absent_body-p15.5
 429. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#excellency-p107.1
 430. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=3#agony-p32.2
 431. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=11#agony-p42.2
 432. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=18#agony-p26.2
 433. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=15#excellency-p78.1
 434. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=16#absent_body-p20.8
 435. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#absent_body-p25.5
 436. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#excellency-p108.1
 437. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=13#dependence.2-p30.5
 438. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=23#excellency-p82.2
 439. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=36#excellency-p82.2
 440. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=37#excellency-p82.2
 441. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=41#excellency-p82.2
 442. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=55#absent_body-p12.10
 443. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=22#pressing-p26.1
 444. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=2#hypocrites-p49.4
 445. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=39#pardon-p12.2
 446. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=11#divineTruth-p70.1
 447. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=11#knowledge-p61.1
 448. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=25#flatteries-p26.1
 449. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#flatteries-p22.1
 450. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#justice-p54.1
 451. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=19#i-p26.1
 452. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=19#justice-p0.4
 453. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#excellency-p46.1
 454. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#gssm-p19.1
 455. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#justice-p103.1
 456. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#pardon-p13.1
 457. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=20#pardon-p15.1
 458. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=10#excellency-p68.1
 459. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=18#justice-p17.1
 460. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=0#destruction-p26.1
 461. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=1#hypocrites-p40.5
 462. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#absent_body-p22.3
 463. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#absent_body-p32.2
 464. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=20#destruction-p25.1
 465. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=20#destruction-p50.2
 466. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#hypocrites-p20.2
 467. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=18#i-p8.1
 468. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=18#gssm-p2.3
 469. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=20#justice-p57.2
 470. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=22#sinners-p33.1
 471. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=22#destruction-p31.1
 472. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=22#destruction-p36.2
 473. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=2#divineTruth-p73.1
 474. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=6#safety-p70.1
 475. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#divineTruth-p28.1
 476. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#knowledge-p20.1
 477. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=17#gssm-p29.3
 478. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=22#hypocrites-p51.3
 479. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=36#dependence.2-p31.1
 480. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=2#agony-p91.1
 481. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=12#hypocrites-p49.5
 482. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=14#safety-p85.2
 483. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=30#agony-p2.5
 484. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=4#knowledge-p52.1
 485. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=26#supernatural_light-p53.1
 486. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=26#gssm-p31.1
 487. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=28#excellency-p18.2
 488. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=29#i-p10.1
 489. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=29#gssm-p40.1
 490. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=29#dependence.2-p1.3
 491. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#divineTruth-p83.3
 492. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#knowledge-p74.3
 493. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=21#absent_body-p28.2
 494. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#hypocrites-p31.1
 495. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#excellency-p62.2
 496. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=2#pressing-p63.1
 497. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=10#gssm-p40.2
 498. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#divineTruth-p82.1
 499. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#knowledge-p73.1
 500. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=6#dependence.2-p31.2
 501. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=6#dependence.2-p25.2
 502. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=26#pressing-p18.1
 503. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=12#hypocrites-p57.2
 504. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=22#future-p32.1
 505. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=22#pressing-p71.1
 506. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=28#divineTruth-p59.1
 507. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=28#knowledge-p49.1
 508. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#absent_body-p15.2
 509. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#supernatural_light-p37.2
 510. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=2#knowledge-p19.1
 511. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=2#divineTruth-p27.1
 512. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=6#knowledge-p19.1
 513. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=33#destruction-p28.1
 514. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=13#hypocrites-p57.1
 515. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#dependence.2-p29.4
 516. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#supernatural_light-p58.1
 517. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#supernatural_light-p37.1
 518. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#supernatural_light-p41.2
 519. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#dependence.2-p13.2
 520. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=3#i-p12.1
 521. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=8#absent_body-p1.2
 522. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#dependence.2-p20.1
 523. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=6#mansions-p39.1
 524. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=2#absent_body-p12.2
 525. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=2#absent_body-p12.11
 526. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=15#agony-p103.2
 527. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=15#supernatural_light-p41.3
 528. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#pardon-p13.2
 529. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#dependence.2-p30.2
 530. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=27#safety-p85.1
 531. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#absent_body-p25.3
 532. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#excellency-p110.1
 533. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=19#agony-p103.1
 534. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=24#pressing-p37.1
 535. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#absent_body-p13.3
 536. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#dependence.2-p29.5
 537. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=19#dependence.2-p19.1
 538. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=33#dependence.2-p30.4
 539. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=5#absent_body-p22.1
 540. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=8#dependence.2-p13.1
 541. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#dependence.2-p20.2
 542. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=13#safety-p55.2
 543. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=18#safety-p55.2
 544. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=19#safety-p55.2
 545. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=19#mansions-p11.2
 546. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=14#absent_body-p13.1
 547. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=15#mansions-p11.1
 548. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=9#absent_body-p12.1
 549. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#divineTruth-p59.2
 550. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#knowledge-p49.2
 551. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=24#dependence.2-p20.3
 552. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=12#justice-p35.1
 553. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=18#hypocrites-p22.2
 554. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=18#hypocrites-p49.6
 555. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=9#divineTruth-p62.1
 556. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=9#knowledge-p52.2
 557. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#excellency-p26.1
 558. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#excellency-p37.5
 559. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#excellency-p79.1
 560. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=12#manner-p19.1
 561. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=6#gssm-p33.3
 562. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=11#pressing-p19.1
 563. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=13#manner-p14.1
 564. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=14#knowledge-p47.1
 565. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#absent_body-p12.8
 566. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#excellency-p39.1
 567. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=20#absent_body-p13.2
 568. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=23#pardon-p16.4
 569. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=12#dependence.2-p20.4
 570. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#excellency-p85.1
 571. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=11#excellency-p18.4
 572. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=11#safety-p88.1
 573. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=2#hypocrites-p49.7
 574. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=12#agony-p2.7
 575. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=3#manner-p47.4
 576. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=6#agony-p89.1
 577. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=17#hypocrites-p49.8
 578. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=13#pardon-p15.2
 579. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=12#absent_body-p32.3
 580. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=20#destruction-p29.1
 581. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=25#pressing-p26.2
 582. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=5#manner-p18.1
 583. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=0#divineTruth-p49.1
 584. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=1#knowledge-p39.1
 585. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=8#excellency-p26.3
 586. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=3#justice-p87.1
 587. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=12#hypocrites-p57.3
 588. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=14#hypocrites-p54.2
 589. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=1#hypocrites-p57.4
 590. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=6#agony-p73.1
 591. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=7#agony-p60.1
 592. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=8#excellency-p37.4
 593. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=12#i-p14.1
 594. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=12#i-p28.1
 595. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=12#divineTruth-p1.3
 596. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=12#knowledge-p0.4
 597. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=0#divineTruth-p62.2
 598. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=0#knowledge-p52.3
 599. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=7#destruction-p60.2
 600. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=7#pressing-p75.1
 601. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=13#gssm-p41.1
 602. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=27#dependence.2-p24.1
 603. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=12#mansions-p9.4
 604. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=32#manner-p28.1
 605. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=38#hypocrites-p51.2
 606. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=7#manner-p3.1
 607. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=7#manner-p41.1
 608. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=13#absent_body-p12.7
 609. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=39#absent_body-p34.1
 610. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=2#excellency-p34.1
 611. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=10#dependence.2-p28.1
 612. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#hypocrites-p40.1
 613. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#mansions-p9.5
 614. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#absent_body-p13.4
 615. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#divineTruth-p83.1
 616. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=5#knowledge-p74.1
 617. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=5#excellency-p18.1
 618. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=16#hypocrites-p64.1
 619. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=18#hypocrites-p64.1
 620. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#absent_body-p12.9
 621. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=5#dependence.2-p21.1
 622. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#absent_body-p15.1
 623. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=10#knowledge-p35.1
 624. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=10#divineTruth-p42.1
 625. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=11#safety-p2.1
 626. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#divineTruth-p70.2
 627. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#knowledge-p35.1
 628. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#knowledge-p61.2
 629. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=16#manner-p48.1
 630. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=20#excellency-p34.2
 631. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=23#excellency-p43.2
 632. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#manner-p38.3
 633. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=20#manner-p6.2
 634. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=20#manner-p43.2
 635. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=7#hypocrites-p49.9
 636. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=7#hypocrites-p59.1
 637. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=17#hypocrites-p57.5
 638. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=7#pardon-p12.1
 639. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#hypocrites-p40.2
 640. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=6#supernatural_light-p40.1
 641. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=11#supernatural_light-p40.2
 642. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=19#supernatural_light-p18.1
 643. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=3#divineTruth-p52.3
 644. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=3#knowledge-p42.3
 645. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=17#absent_body-p20.4
 646. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=7#excellency-p93.5
 647. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=10#hypocrites-p55.4
 648. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=26#absent_body-p32.15
 649. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=11#hypocrites-p55.1
 650. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=12#absent_body-p22.2
 651. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=12#mansions-p41.1
 652. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=17#flatteries-p31.1
 653. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=20#excellency-p98.5
 654. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=21#absent_body-p28.1
 655. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=21#agony-p93.1
 656. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=21#pressing-p63.2
 657. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=0#absent_body-p36.2
 658. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=1#excellency-p2.1
 659. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=5#absent_body-p20.5
 660. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=5#i-p16.1
 661. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=5#excellency-p1.3
 662. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=6#absent_body-p20.6
 663. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=9#destruction-p36.1
 664. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=9#excellency-p65.1
 665. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=10#absent_body-p32.5
 666. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=1#pressing-p60.1
 667. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=9#mansions-p21.2
 668. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=17#absent_body-p20.7
 669. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=17#excellency-p88.2
 670. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=1#excellency-p88.1
 671. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=10#destruction-p32.1
 672. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=15&scrV=2#absent_body-p36.4
 673. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=15&scrV=5#mansions-p9.3
 674. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=5#destruction-p30.2
 675. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=20#absent_body-p12.12
 676. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=0#absent_body-p32.18
 677. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=1#destruction-p30.3
 678. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=5#absent_body-p36.5
 679. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=7#absent_body-p33.1
 680. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=15#sinners-p30.3
 681. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=4#absent_body-p32.14
 682. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=11#excellency-p90.1
 683. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=23#absent_body-p15.4
 684. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=1#dependence.2-p29.2
 685. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=3#absent_body-p36.1
 686. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=16#excellency-p93.3
 687. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=16#excellency-p98.6
 688. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=22#manner-p0.3
 689. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=35#sinners-p0.6
 690. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=27&scrV=10#hypocrites-p0.3
 691. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=11#pardon-p1.1
 692. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=2#flatteries-p0.3
 693. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=32&scrV=2#safety-p0.3
 694. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=15&scrV=2#destruction-p0.3
 695. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=22&scrV=14#future-p0.4
 696. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=17#supernatural_light-p2.1
 697. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=16#pressing-p0.3
 698. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=44#agony-p0.6
 699. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=44#agony-p0.7
 700. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=2#mansions-p0.9
 701. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=19#justice-p0.3
 702. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=18#gssm-p2.2
 703. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=29#dependence.2-p1.2
 704. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=8#absent_body-p1.1
 705. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=12#divineTruth-p1.2
 706. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=12#knowledge-p0.3
 707. file://localhost/ccel/e/edwards/sermons/cache/sermons.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=5#excellency-p1.2
