<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<osis xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.bibletechnologies.net/2003/OSIS/namespace http://www.bibletechnologies.net/osisCore.2.1.1.xsd"
	xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://www.bibletechnologies.net/2003/OSIS/namespace">
	<osisText osisRefWork="book" xml:lang="en" osisIDWork="Reality">
		<header>
			<work osisWork="EMBReality">
				<title>The Reality of Prayer</title>
				<creator role="aut">E.M. Bounds</creator>
			</work>
			<work osisWork="Bible">
				<refSystem>Bible</refSystem>
			</work>
		</header>
		<div type="book" osisID="EMBReality">
			<title>The Reality of Prayer</title>
			<title type="x-author">E.M. Bounds</title>
			<p>

The Reality of Prayer

Edward M. Bounds (1835-1913)
     __________________________________________________________________

                             THE REALITY OF PRAYER

FOREWARD

   During the last 25 years of the nineteenth century and a score of years
   of the twentieth, there lived and died three great men of God whom I
   knew--men whom God has doubtless numbered among the foremost of His
   heavenly host. The first was Edward McKendree Bounds, author of this
   present volume and the other "Spiritual Life" Books. The second was
   Claud L. Chilton, minister for many years in the Methodist Episcopal
   Church, South, and a musical composer of religious music of
   considerable note. The third, Clement C. Cary, preacher and editor,
   lost his life in an automobile accident in 1922. The fourth was Dr. B.
   F. Haynes, minister, editor and author, who died in Nashville, in 1923.

   What Dr. Thomas Goodwin, the Puritan, was to Strong, Arrowsmith and
   Sparstow; what John Wesley was to Whitefield, Fletcher and Clark,
   Bounds was to Chilton, Cary and Haynes. What David Brainerd's Journal
   did for Cary, Martyn, McCheyne, Bounds' books can do for thousands of
   God's children. He was a man who lived ever on prayer ground. He walked
   and talked with the Lord. Prayer was the great weapon in his arsenal,
   his pathway to the Throne of Grace. None who read what he has written
   can fail of realising that Edward McKendree Bounds talked with God, as
   a man talketh to his friend.

   Homer W. Hodge

   Flushing, N.Y.
     __________________________________________________________________

I. PRAYER--A PRIVILEGE, PRINCELY, SACRED

   I am the creature of a day, passing through life as an arrow through
   the air. I am a spirit come from God and returning to God; just
   hovering over the great gulf; till a few moments hence I am no more
   seen; I drop into an unchangeable eternity! I want to know one thing,
   the way to heaven; how to land safe on that happy shore. God Himself
   has condescended to teach the way; for this end He came from heaven. He
   hath written it down in a book. give me that book! At any price give me
   the Book of God! Lord, is it not Thy word--"If any man lack wisdom, let
   him ask of God? Thou givest liberally, and upbraidest not. Thou hast
   said, if any be willing to do Thy will he shall know. I am willing to
   do; let me know Thy will."--John Wesley

   The word "Prayer" expresses the largest and most comprehensive approach
   unto God. It gives prominence to the element of devotion. It is
   communion and intercourse with God. It is enjoyment of God. It is
   access to God. "Supplication" is a more restricted and more intense
   form of prayer, accompanied by a sense of personal need, limited to the
   seeking in an urgent manner of a supply for pressing need.

   "Supplication" is the very soul of prayer in the way of pleading for
   some one thing, greatly needed, and the need intensely felt.

   "Intercession" is an enlargement in prayer, a going out in broadness
   and fullness from self to others. Primarily, it does not centre in
   praying for others, but refers to the freeness, boldness and childlike
   confidence of the praying. It is the fullness of confiding influence in
   the soul's approach to God, unlimited and unhesitating in its access
   and its demands. This influence and confident trust is to be used for
   others.

   Prayer always, and everywhere is an immediate and confiding approach
   to, and a request of, God the Father. In the prayer universal and
   perfect, as the pattern of all praying, it is "Our Father, Who art in
   Heaven." At the grave of Lazarus, Jesus lifted up His eyes and said,
   "Father." In His sacerdotal prayer, Jesus lifted up His eyes to Heaven,
   and said, "Father." Personal, familiar and paternal was all His
   praying. Strong, tool and touching and tearful, was His praying. Read
   these words of Paul: "Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered
   up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him
   that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared"
   (Hebrews 5:7).

   So elsewhere (James 1:5) we have "asking" set forth as prayer: "If any
   of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth to all men
   liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him."

   "Asking of God" and "receiving" from the Lord--direct application to
   God, immediate connection with God--that is prayer.

   In John 5:13 we have this statement about prayer:

   "And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask
   anything according to his will, he heareth us. And if we know that he
   heareth us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that
   we desired of him."

   In Phil. 4:6 we have these words about prayer:

   "Be careful for nothing, but in everything, by prayer and supplication,
   with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God."

   What is God's will about prayer? First of all, it is God's will that we
   pray. Jesus Christ "spake a parable unto them to this end, that men
   ought always to pray, and not to faint"

   Paul writes to young Timothy about the first things which God's people
   are to do, and first among the first he puts prayer: "I exhort,
   therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions,
   and giving of thanks, be made for all men" (1 Tim. 2:1).

   In connection with these words Paul declares that the will of God and
   the redemption and mediation of Jesus Christ for the salvation for all
   men are all vitally concerned in this matter of prayer. In this his
   apostolical authority and solicitude of soul conspire with God's will
   and Christ's intercession to will that "the men pray everywhere."

   Note how frequently prayer is brought forward in the New Testament:
   "Continuing instant in prayer"; "Pray without ceasing"; "Continue in
   prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving"; "Be ye sober and
   watch unto prayer"; Christ's clarion call was "watch and pray." What
   are all these and others, if it is not the will of God that men should
   pray?

   Prayer is complement, make efficient and cooperate with God's will,
   whose sovereign sway is to run parallel in extent and power with the
   atonement of Jesus Christ. He, through the Eternal Spirit, by the grace
   of God, "tasted death for every man." We, through the Eternal Spirit,
   by the grace of God, pray for every man.

   But how do I know that I am praying by the will of God? Every true
   attempt to pray is in response to the will of God. Bungling it may be
   and untutored by human teachers, but it is accept-able to God, because
   it is in obedience to His will. If I will give myself up to the
   inspiration of the Spirit of God, who commands me to pray, the details
   and the petitions of that praying will all fall into harmony with the
   will of Him who wills that I should pray.

   Prayer is no little thing, no selfish and small matter. It does not
   concern the petty interests of one person. The littlest prayer broadens
   out by the will of God till it touches all words, conserves all
   interests, and enhances man's greatest wealth, and God's greatest good.
   God is so concerned that men pray that He has promised to answer
   prayer. He has not promised to do something general if we pray, but He
   has promised to do the very thing for which we pray.

   Prayer, as taught by Jesus in its essential features, enters into all
   the relations of life. It sanctifies brotherliness. To the Jew, the
   altar was the symbol and place of prayer. The Jew devoted the altar to
   the worship of God. Jesus Christ takes the altar of prayer and devotes
   it to the worship of the brotherhood. How Christ purifies the altar and
   enlarges it! How He takes it out of the sphere of a mere performance,
   and makes its virtue to consist, not in the mere act of praying, but in
   the spirit which actuates us toward men. Our spirit toward folks is of
   the life of prayer. We must be at peace with men, and, if possible,
   have them at peace with us, before we can be at peace with God.
   Reconciliation with men is the forerunner of reconciliation with God.
   Our spirit and words must embrace men before they can embrace God.
   Unity with the brotherhood goes before unity with God. "Therefore, if
   thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy
   brother hath aught against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar,
   and go thy way. First, be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and
   offer thy gift" (Matthew 5:23).

   Non-praying is lawlessness, discord, anarchy. Prayer, in the moral
   government of God, is as strong and far-reaching as the law of
   gravitation in the material world, and it is as necessary as
   gravitation to hold things in their proper sphere and in life.

   The space occupied by prayer in the Sermon on the Mount bespeaks its
   estimate by Christ and the importance it holds in His system. Many
   important principles are discussed in a verse or two. The Sermon
   consists of one hundred and eleven verses, and eighteen are about
   prayer directly, and others indirectly.

   Prayer was one of the cardinal principles of piety in every
   dispensation and to every child of God. It did not pertain to the
   business of Christ to originate duties, but to recover, to recast, to
   spiritualise, and to reinforce those duties which are cardinal and
   original.

   With Moses the great features of prayer are prominent. He never beats
   the air nor fights a sham battle. The most serious and strenuous
   business of his serious and strenuous life was prayer. He is much at it
   with the intensest earnestness of his soul. Intimate as he was with
   God, his intimacy did not abate the necessity of prayer. This intimacy
   only brought clearer insight into the nature and necessity of prayer,
   and led him to see the greater obligations to pray, and to discover the
   larger results of praying. In reviewing one of the crises through which
   Israel passed, when the very existence of the nation was imperilled, he
   writes: "I fell down before the Lord forty days and forty nights."
   Wonderful praying and wonderful results! Moses knew how to do wonderful
   praying, and God knew how to give wonderful results.

   The whole force of Bible statement is to increase our faith in the
   doctrine that prayer affects God, secures favors from God, which can be
   secured in no other way, and which will not be bestowed by God if we do
   not pray. The whole canon of Bible teaching is to illustrate the great
   truth that God hears and answers prayer. One of the great purposes of
   God in His book is to impress upon us indelibly the great importance,
   the priceless value, and the absolute necessity of asking God for the
   things which we need for time and eternity. He urges us by every
   consideration, and presses and warns us by every interest. He points us
   to His own Son, turned over to us for our good, as His pledge that
   prayer will be answered, teaching us that God is our Father, able to do
   all things for us and to give all things to us, much more than earthly
   parents are able or willing to do for their children.

   Let us thoroughly understand ourselves and understand, also, this great
   business of prayer. Our one great business is prayer, and we will never
   do it well without we fasten to it by all binding force. We will never
   do it well without arranging the best conditions of doing it well.
   Satan has suffered so much by good praying that all his wily, shrewd
   and ensnaring devices will be used to cripple its performances.

   We must, by all the fastenings we can find, cable ourselves to prayer.
   To be loose in time and place is to open the door to Satan. To be
   exact, prompt, unswerving, and careful in even the little things, is to
   buttress ourselves against the Evil One.

   Prayer, by God's very oath, is put in the very stones of God's
   foundations, as eternal as its companion, "And men shall pray for him
   continually." This is the eternal condition which advances His cause,
   and makes it powerfully aggressive. Men are to always pray for it. Its
   strength, beauty and aggression lie in their prayers. Its power lies
   simply in its power to pray. No power is found elsewhere but in its
   ability to pray. "For my house shall be called the house of prayer for
   all people." It is based on prayer, and carried on by the same means.

   Prayer is a privilege, a sacred, princely privilege. Prayer is a duty,
   an obligation most binding, and most imperative, which should hold us
   to it. But prayer is more than a privilege, more than a duty. It is a
   means, an instrument, a condition. Not to pray is to lose much more
   than to fail in the exercise and enjoyment of a high, or sweet
   privilege. Not to pray is to fail along lines far more important than
   even the violation of an obligation.

   Prayer is the appointed condition of getting God's aid. This aid is as
   manifold and illimitable as God's ability, and as varied and
   exhaustless is this aid as man's need. Prayer is the avenue through
   which God supplies man's wants. Prayer is the channel through which all
   good flows from God to man, and all good from men to men. God is the
   Christian's father. Asking and giving are in that relation.

   Man is the one more immediately concerned in this great work of
   praying. It ennobles man's reason to employ it in prayer. The office
   and work of prayer is the divinest engagement of man's reason. Prayer
   makes man's reason to shine. Intelligence of the highest order approves
   prayer. He is the wisest man who prays the most and the best. Prayer is
   the school of wisdom as well as of piety.

   Prayer is not a picture to handle, to admire, to look at. It is not
   beauty, coloring, shape, attitude, imagination, or genius. These things
   do not pertain to its character or conduct. It is not poetry nor music.
   Its inspiration and melody come from Heaven. Prayer belongs to the
   spirit, and at times it possesses the spirit and stirs the spirit with
   high and holy purposes and resolves.
     __________________________________________________________________

II. PRAYER--FILLS MAN'S POVERTY WITH GOD'S RICHES

   For two hours I struggled on, forsaken of God, and met neither God nor
   man, all one chilly afternoon. When at last, standing still and looking
   at Schiehallion clothed in white from top to bottom, this of David shot
   up into my heart: "Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow!" In a
   moment I was with God, or rather God was with me. I walked home with my
   heart in a flame of fire.--Alexander Whyte, D.D.

   We have much fine writing and learned talk about the subjective
   benefits of prayer; how prayer secures its full measure of results, not
   by affecting God, but by affecting us, by becoming a training school
   for those who pray. We are taught by such teachers that the province of
   prayer is not to get, but to train. Prayer thus becomes a mere
   performance, a drill-sergeant, a school, in which patience, tranquility
   and dependence are taught. In this school, denial of prayer is the most
   valuable teacher. How well all this may look, and how reasonable soever
   it may seem, there is nothing of it in the Bible. The clear and
   oftrepeated language of the Bible is that prayer is to be answered by
   God; that God occupies the relation of a father to us, and that as
   Father He gives to us when we ask the things for which we ask. The best
   praying, therefore, is the praying that gets an answer.

   The possibilities and necessity of prayer are graven in the eternal
   foundations of the Gospel. The relation that is established between the
   Father and the Son and the decreed covenant between the two, has prayer
   as the base of its existence, and the conditions of the advance and
   success of the Gospel. Prayer is the condition by which all foes are to
   be overcome and all the inheritance is to be possessed.

   These are axiomatic truths, though they may be very homely ones. But
   these are the times when Bible axioms need to be stressed, pressed,
   iterated and reiterated. The very air is rife with influences,
   practices and theories which sap foundations, and the most veritable
   truths and the most self-evident axioms go down by insidious and
   invisible attacks.

   More than this: the tendency of these times is to an ostentatious
   parade of doing, which enfeebles the life and dissipates the spirit of
   praying. There may be kneeling, and there may be standing in prayerful
   attitude. There may be much bowing of the head, and yet there may be no
   serious, real praying. Prayer is real work. Praying is vital work.
   Prayer has in its keeping the very heart of worship. There may be the
   exhibit, the circumstance, and the pomp of praying, and yet no real
   praying. There may be much attitude, gesture, and verbiage, but no
   praying.

   Who can approach into God's presence in prayer? Who can come before the
   great God, Maker of all worlds, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
   Christ, who holds in His hands all good, and who is all powerful and
   able to do all things? Man's approach to this great God--what
   lowliness, what truth, what cleanness of hands, and purity of heart is
   needed and demanded!

   Definition of prayer scarcely belongs to Bible range at any point.
   Everywhere we are impressed that it is more important and urgent that
   men pray, than that they be skilled in the homiletic didactics of
   prayer. That is a thing of the heart, not of the schools. It is more of
   feeling than of words. Praying is the best school in which to learn to
   pray, prayer the best dictionary to define the art and nature of
   praying.

   We repeat and reiterate. Prayer is not a mere habit, riveted by custom
   and memory, something which must be gone through with, its value
   depending upon the decency and perfection of the performance. Prayer is
   not a duty which must be performed, to ease obligation and to quiet
   conscience. Prayer is not mere privilege, a sacred indulgence to be
   taken advantage of, at leisure, at pleasure, at will, and no serious
   loss attending its omission.

   Prayer is a solemn service due to God, an adoration, a worship, an
   approach to God for some request, the presenting of some desire, the
   expression of some need to Him, who supplies all need, and who
   satisfies all desires; who, as a Father, finds His greatest pleasure in
   relieving the wants and granting the desires of His children. Prayer is
   the child's request, not to the winds nor to the world, but to the
   Father. Prayer is the outstretched arms of the child for the Father's
   help. Prayer is the child's cry calling to the Father's ear, the
   Father's heart, and to the Father's ability, which the Father is to
   hear, the Father is to feel, and which the Father is to relieve. Prayer
   is the seeking of God's great and greatest good, which will not come if
   we do not pray.

   Prayer is an ardent and believing cry to God for some specific thing.
   God's rule is to answer by giving the specific thing asked for. With it
   may come much of other gifts and graces. Strength, serenity, sweetness,
   and faith may come as the bearers of the gifts. But even they come
   because God hears and answers prayer.

   We do but follow the plain letter and spirit of the Bible when we
   affirm that God answers prayer, and answers by giving us the very
   things we desire, and that the withholding of that which we desire and
   the giving of something else is not the rule, but rare and exceptional.
   When His children cry for bread He gives them bread.

   Revelation does not deal in philosophical subtleties, nor verbal
   niceties and hair-splitting distinctions. It unfolds relationships,
   declares principles, and enforces duties. The heart must define, the
   experience must realise. Paul came on the stage too late to define
   prayer. That which had been so well done by patriarchs and prophets
   needed no return to dictionaries. Christ is Himself the illustration
   and definition of prayer. He prayed as man had never prayed. He put
   prayer on a higher basis, with grander results and simpler being than
   it had ever known. He taught Paul how to pray by the revelation of
   Himself, which is the first call to prayer, and the first lesson in
   praying. Prayer, like love, is too ethereal and too heavenly to be held
   in the gross arms of chilly definitions. It belongs to Heaven, and to
   the heart, and not to words and ideas only.

   Prayer is no petty invention of man, a fancied relief for fancied ills.
   Prayer is no dreary performance, dead and death-dealing, but is God's
   enabling act for man, living and life-giving, joy and joy-giving.
   Prayer is the contact of a living soul with God. In prayer, God stoops
   to kiss man, to bless man, and to aid man in everything that God can
   devise or man can need. Prayer fills man's emptiness with God's
   fullness. It fills man's poverty with God's riches. It puts away man's
   weakness with God's strength. It banishes man's littleness with God's
   greatness. Prayer is God's plan to supply man's great and continuous
   need with God's great and continuous abundance.

   What is this prayer to which men are called? It is not a mere form, a
   child's play. It is serious, difficult work, the manliest, the
   mightiest work, the divinest work which man can do. Prayer lifts men
   out of the earthliness and links them with the heavenly. Men are never
   nearer Heaven, nearer God, never more God-like, never in deeper
   sympathy and truer partnership with Jesus Christ, than when praying.
   Love, philanthropy, holy affiances,--all of them helpful and tender for
   men--are born and perfected by prayer.

   Prayer is not merely a question of duty, but of salvation. Are men
   saved who are not men of prayer? Is not the gift, the inclination, the
   habit of prayer, one of the elements or characteristics of salvation?
   Can it be possible to be in affinity with Jesus Christ and not be
   prayerful? Is it possible to have the Holy Spirit and not have the
   spirit of prayer? Can one have the new birth and not be born to prayer?
   Is not the life of the Spirit and the life of prayer coordinate and
   consistent? Can brotherly love be in the heart which is unschooled in
   prayer?

   We have two kinds of prayer named in the New Testament--prayer and
   supplication. Prayer denotes prayer in general. Supplication is a more
   intense and more special form of prayer. These two, supplication and
   prayer, ought to be combined. Then we would have devotion in its widest
   and sweetest form, and supplication with its most earnest and personal
   sense of need.

   In Paul's Prayer Directory, found in Ephes. 6, we are taught to be
   always in prayer, as we are always in the battle. The Holy Spirit is to
   be sought by intense supplication, and our supplications are to be
   charged by His vitalising, illuminating and ennobling energy.
   Watchfulness is to fit us for this intense praying and intense
   fighting. Perseverance is an essential element in successful praying,
   as in every other realm of conflict. The saints universal are to be
   helped on to victory by the aid of our prayers. Apostolic courage,
   ability and success are to be gained by the prayers of the soldier
   saints everywhere.

   It is only those of deep and true vision who can administer prayer.
   These "Living Creatures," in Rev. 4:6, are described as "full of eyes
   before and behind," "full of eyes within." Eyes are for seeing.
   Clearness, intensity,[ ]and perfection of sight are in it. Vigilance
   and profound insight are in it, the faculty of knowing. It is by prayer
   that the eyes of our hearts are opened. Clear, profound knowledge of
   the mysteries of grace is secured by prayer. These "Living Creatures"
   had eyes "within and without" They were "full of eyes." The highest
   form of life is intelligent. Ignorance is degrading and low, in the
   spiritual realm as it is in other realms. Prayer gives us eyes to see
   God. Prayer is seeing God. The prayer life is knowledge without and
   within. All vigilance without, all vigilance within. There can be no
   intelligent prayer without knowledge within. Our inner condition and
   our inner needs must be felt and known.

   It takes prayer to minister. It takes life, the highest form of life,
   to minister. Prayer is the highest intelligence, the profoundest
   wisdom, the most vital, the most joyous, the most efficacious, the most
   powerful of all vocations. It is life, radiant, transporting, eternal
   life. Away with dry forms, with dead, cold habits of prayer! Away with
   sterile routine, with senseless performances and petty playthings in
   prayer! Let us get at the serious work, the chief business of men, that
   of prayer. Let us work at it skillfully. Let us seek to be adepts in
   this great work of praying. Let us be master-workmen, in this high art
   of praying. Let us be so in the habit of prayer, so devoted to prayer,
   so filled with its rich spices, so ardent by its holy flame, that all
   Heaven and earth will be perfumed by its aroma, and nations yet in the
   womb will be blest by our prayers. Heaven will be fuller and brighter
   in glorious inhabitants, earth will be better prepared for its bridal
   day, and hell robbed of many of its victims, because we have lived to
   pray.

   There is not only a sad and ruinous neglect of any attempt to pray, but
   there is an immense waste in the seeming praying which is done, as
   official praying, state praying, mere habit praying. Men cleave to the
   form and semblance of a thing after the heart and reality have gone out
   of it. This finds illustrations in many who seem to pray. Formal
   praying has a strong hold and a strong following.

   Hannah's statement to Eli and her defense against his charge of
   hypocrisy was: "I have poured out my soul before the Lord." 1 Samuel 1:15. God's
   serious promise to the Jews was, "Then shall ye call upon me, and ye
   shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you. And ye shall
   seek me and find me when ye shall search for me with all your heart." Jeremiah 29:13.

   Let all the present day praying be measured by these standards "Pouring
   out the soul before God," and "Seeking with all the heart," and how
   much of it will be found to be mere form, waste, worthless. James says
   of Elijah that he "prayed with prayer." James 5:17.

   In Paul's directions to Timothy about prayer, (1 Tim. 1:8) we have a
   comprehensive verbal description of prayer in its different
   departments, or varied manifestations. They are all in the plural form,
   supplications, prayers and intercessions. They declare the
   many-sidedness, the endless diversity, and the necessity of going
   beyond the formal simplicity of a single prayer, and press and add
   prayer upon prayer, supplication to supplication, intercession over and
   over again, until the combined force of prayers in their most
   superlative modes, unite their aggregation and pressure with cumulative
   power to our praying. The unlimited superlative and the unlimited
   plural are the only measures of prayer. The one term of "prayer" is the
   common and comprehensive one for the act, the duty, the spirit, and the
   service we call prayer. It is the condensed statement of worship. The
   heavenly worship does not have the element of prayer so conspicuous.
   Prayer is the conspicuous, all-important essence and the all-colouring
   ingredient of earthly worship, while praise is the pre-eminent,
   comprehensive, all-colouring, all-inspiring element of the heavenly
   worship.
     __________________________________________________________________

III. PRAYER--THE ALL-IMPORTANT ESSENCE OF EARTHLY WORSHIP

   Where the spiritual consciousness is concerned--the department which
   asks the question and demands the evidence--no evidence is competent or
   relevant except such as is spiritual. Only that which is above matter
   and above logic can be heard, because the very question at issue is the
   existence and personality of a spiritual and supernatural God. Only the
   Spirit himself beareth witness with our spirit. This must be done in a
   spiritual or supernatural way, or it cannot be done at all.--C.L.
   Chilton

   The Jewish law and the prophets know something of God as a Father.
   Occasional and imperfect, yet comforting glimpses they had of the great
   truth of God's Fatherhood, and of our sonship. Christ lays the
   foundation of prayer deep and strong with this basic principle. The law
   of prayer, the right to pray, rests on sonship. "Our Father" brings us
   into the closest relationship to God. Prayer is the child's approach,
   the child's plea, the child's right. It is the law of prayer that looks
   up, that lifts up the eye to "Our Father, Who art in Heaven." Our
   Father's house is our home in Heaven. Heavenly citizenship and heavenly
   homesickness are in prayer; Prayer is an appeal from the lowness, from
   the emptiness, from the need of earth, to the highness, the fullness
   and to the all-sufficiency of Heaven. Prayer turns the eye and the
   heart heavenward with a child's longings, a child's trust and a child's
   expectancy. To hallow God's Name, to speak it with bated breath, to
   hold it sacredly, this also belongs to prayer.

   In this connection it might be said that it is requisite to dictate to
   children the necessity of prayer in order to their salvation. But alas!
   Unhappily it is thought sufficient to tell them there is a Heaven and a
   hell; that they must avoid the latter place and seek to reach the
   former. Yet they are not taught the easiest way to arrive at salvation.
   The only way to Heaven is by the route of prayer, such prayer of the
   heart which every one is capable of. It is prayer, not of reasonings
   which are the fruits of study, or of the exercise of the imagination,
   which fills the mind with wondering objects, but which fails to settle
   salvation, but the simple, confidential prayer of the child to his
   Father in Heaven.

   Poverty of spirit enters into true praying. "Blessed are the poor in
   spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven." (Matthew 5:3) "The poor" means paupers,
   beggars, those who live on the bounties of others, who live by begging.
   Christ's people live by asking. "Prayer is the Christian's vital
   breath." It is his affluent inheritance, his daily annuity.

   In His own example, Christ illustrates the nature and necessity of
   prayer. Everywhere He declares that he who is on God's mission in this
   world will pray. He is an illustrious example of the principle that the
   more devoted the man is to God, the more prayerful will he be. The
   diviner the man, the more of the Spirit of the Father and of the Son he
   has, the more prayerful will he be. And, conversely, it is true that
   the more prayerful he is, the more of the Spirit of the Father and of
   the Son will he receive.

   The great events and crowning periods of the life of Jesus we find Him
   in prayer--at the beginning of His ministry, at the fords of the
   Jordan, when the Holy Spirit descended upon Him; just prior to the
   transfiguration, and in the garden of Gethsemane. Well do the words of
   Peter come in here: "Leaving us an example that ye should follow His
   steps." (1 Peter 2:21).

   There is an important principle of prayer found in some of the miracles
   of Christ. It is the progressive nature of the answer to prayer. Not at
   once does God always give the full answer to prayer, but rather
   progressively, step by step. Mark 8:22 describes a case which
   illustrates this important truth, too often overlooked.

   "And he cometh to Bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him, and
   besought him to touch him.

   "And he took the blind man by the hand, and led him out of the town;
   and when he had spit on his eyes, and put His hands upon him, he asked
   him if he saw aught.

   "And he looked up, and said, I see men as trees, walking.'

   "After that he put his hands again upon his eyes, and made him look up;
   and he was restored, and saw every man clearly."

   Alone He has to take us at times, aside from the world, where He can
   have us all to Himself, and there speak to and deal with us.

   We have three cures in blindness in the life of our Lord, which
   illustrate the nature of God's working in answering prayer, and show
   the exhaustless variety and the omnipotence of His working.

   In the first case Christ came incidentally on a blind man at Jerusalem,
   made clay, softened it by spittle, and smeared it on the eyes and then
   commanded the man to go and wash in the pool of Siloam. The gracious
   results lay at the end of his action--washing. The failure to go and
   wash would have been fatal to the cure. No one, not even the blind man,
   in this instance, requested the cure.

   In the second case the parties who bring the blind man, back their
   bringing with earnest prayer for cure; they beseech Christ to simply
   touch him, as though their faith would relieve the burden of a heavy
   operation. But He took the man by the hand and led him out of the town
   and apart from the people. Alone, and in secret, this work was to be
   done. He spat on his eyes and put his hands on them. The response was
   not complete, a dawning of light, a partial recovery; the first
   gracious communication but gave him a disordered vision, the second
   stroke perfected the cure. The man's submissive faith in giving himself
   up to Christ to be led away into privacy and alone, were prominent
   features of the cure, as also the gradual reception of sight, and the
   necessity of a second stroke to finish the perfect work.

   The third was the case of blind Bartimaeus. It was the urgency of faith
   declaring itself in clamourous utterances, rebuked by those who were
   following Christ, but intensified and emboldened by opposition.

   The first case comes on Christ unawares; the second was brought with
   specific intent to Him; the last goes after Christ with irresistible
   urgency, met by the resistance of the multitude and the seeming
   indifference of Christ. The cure, though, was without the interposition
   of any agent, no taking by the hand, no gentle or severe touch, no
   spittle, nor clay, nor washing--a word only and his sight, full-orbed,
   came instantly. Each one had experienced the same divine power, the
   same blessed results, but with marked diversity in the expression of
   their faith and the mode of their cure. Suppose, at their meeting, the
   first had set up the particulars and process of his cure, the spittle,
   the clay, the washing in Siloam as the only Divine process, as the only
   genuine credentials of a Divine work, how far from the truth, how
   narrow and misleading such a standard of decision! Not methods, but
   results, are the tests of the Divine work.

   Each one could say: "This one thing I know, whereas I was blind I now
   see." (John 9:25). The results were conscious results; that Christ did the work they
   knew; faith was the instrument, but its exercise different; the method
   of Christ's working different; the various steps that brought them to
   the gracious end on their part and on His part at many points
   strikingly dissimilar.

   What are the limitations of prayer? How far do its benefits and
   possibilities reach? What part of God's dealing with man, and with
   man's world, is unaffected by prayer? Do the possibilities of prayer
   cover all temporal and spiritual good? The answers to these questions
   are of transcendental importance. The answer will gauge the effort and
   results of our praying. The answer will greatly enhance the value of
   prayer, or will greatly depress prayer. The answer to these important
   questions are fully covered by Paul's words on prayer: "Be careful for
   nothing, but in everything, by prayer and supplication, with
   thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God" (Phil. 4:6).
     __________________________________________________________________

IV. GOD HAS EVERYTHING TO DO WITH PRAYER

   Christ is all. We are complete in Him. He is the answer to every need,
   the perfect Savior. He needs no decoration to heighten His beauty, no
   prop to increase His stability, no girding to perfect His strength. Who
   can gild refined gold, whiten the snow, perfume the rose or heighten
   the colors of the summer sunset? Who will prop the mountains or help
   the great deep? It is not Christ and philosophy, nor Christ and money,
   nor civilization, nor diplomacy, nor science, nor organisation. It is
   Christ alone. He trod the winepress alone. His own arm brought
   salvation. He is enough. He is the comfort, the strength, the wisdom,
   the righteousness, the sanctification of all man.--C. L. Chilton.

   Prayer is God's business to which men can attend. Prayer is God's
   necessary business, which men only can do, and that men must do. Men
   who belong to God are obliged to pray. They are not obliged to grow
   rich, nor to make money. They are not obliged to have large success in
   business. These are incidental, occasional, merely nominal, as far as
   integrity to Heaven and loyalty to God are concerned. Material
   successes are immaterial to God. Men are neither better nor worse with
   those things or without them. They are not sources of reputation nor
   elements of character in the heavenly estimates. But to pray, to really
   pray, is the source of revenue, the basis of reputation, and the
   element of character in the estimation of God. Men are obliged to pray
   as they are obliged to be religious. Prayer is loyalty to God.
   Non-praying is to reject Christ and to abandon Heaven. A life of prayer
   is the only life which Heaven counts.

   God is vitally concerned that men should pray. Men are bettered by
   prayer, and the world is bettered by praying. God does His best work
   for the world through prayer. God's greatest glory and man's highest
   good are secured by prayer. Prayer forms the godliest men and makes the
   godliest world.

   God's promises lie like giant corpses without life, only for decay and
   dust unless men appropriate and vivify these promises by earnest and
   prevailing prayer.

   Promise is like the unsown seed, the germ of life in it, but the soil
   and culture of prayer are necessary to germinate and culture the seed.
   Prayer is God's life-giving breath. God's purposes move along the
   pathway made by prayer to their glorious designs. God's purposes are
   always moving to their high and benignant ends, but the movement is
   along the way marked by unceasing prayer. The breath of prayer in man
   is from God.

   God has everything to do with prayer, as well as everything to do with
   the one who prays. To him who prays, and as he prays, the hour is
   sacred because it is God's hour. The occasion is sacred because it is
   the occasion of the soul's approach to God, and of dealing with God. No
   hour is more hallowed because it is the occasion of the soul's
   mightiest approach to God, and of the fullest revelation from God. Men
   are Godlike and men are blessed, just as the hour of prayer has the
   most of God in it. Prayer makes and measures the approach of God. He
   knows not God who knows not how to pray. He has never seen God whose
   eye has not been couched for God in the closet. God's vision place is
   the closet. His dwelling place is in secret. "He that dwelleth in the
   secret place of the most High shall abide under the shadow of the
   Almighty." (Psalm 91:1).

   He has never studied God who has not had his intellect broadened,
   strengthened, clarified and uplifted by prayer. Almighty God commands
   prayer, God waits on prayer to order His ways, and God delights in
   prayer. To God, prayer is what the incense was to the Jewish Temple. It
   impregnates everything, perfumes everything and sweetens everything.

   The possibilities of prayer cover the whole purposes of God through
   Christ. God conditions all gifts in all dispensations to His Son on
   prayer: "Ask of me," saith God the Father to the Son, as that Son was
   moving earthward on the stupendous enterprise for a world's salvation,
   "and I will give thee the heathen for thy inheritance, and the
   uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession." (Psalm 2:8). Hinging on prayer
   were all the means and results and successes of that wonderful and
   Divine movement for man's salvation. Broad and profound, mysterious and
   wonderful was the scheme.

   The answer to prayer is assured not only by the promises of God, but by
   God's relation to us as a Father.

   "But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou has
   shut thy door, pray to thy Father, which is in secret; and thy Father,
   which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly." (Matt 6:6).

   Again, we have these words: "If ye, being evil, know how to give good
   gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father, which is in
   heaven, give good things to them that ask him?" (Matt 7:11).

   God encourages us to pray, not only by the certainty of the answer, but
   by the munificence of the promise, and the bounty of the Giver. How
   princely the promise! "All things whatsoever." (Matt 21:22).  And when we superadd to
   that "whatsoever" the promise which covers all things and everything,
   without qualification, exception or limitation, "anything," this is to
   expand and make minute and specific the promise. The challenge of God
   to us is "Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and show thee great
   arid mighty things which thou knowest not." (Jer 33:3).  This includes, like the
   answer to Solomon's prayer, that which was specifically prayed for, but
   embraces vastly more of great value and of great necessity.

   Almighty God seems to fear we will hesitate to ask largely,
   apprehensive that we will strain His ability. He declares that He is
   "able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think." (Eph 3:20).  
   He almost paralyses us by giving us a carte blanche, "Ask of me things
   to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands,
   command ye me." (Isaiah 45:11).  How He charges, commands and urges us to pray! He goes
   beyond promise and says: "Behold my Son! I have given Him to you." "He
   that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall
   he not with him freely give us all things?" (Rom 8:32).

   God gave us all things in prayer by promise because He had given us all
   things in His Son. Amazing gift--His Son! Prayer is as illimitable as
   His own Blessed Son. There is nothing on earth nor in Heaven, for time
   or eternity, that God's Son did not secure for us. By prayer God gives
   us the vast and matchless inheritance which is ours by virtue of His
   Son. God charges us to "come boldly to the throne of grace." (Heb 4:16).  God is
   glorified and Christ is honoured by large asking.

   That which is true of the promises of God is equally true of the
   purposes of God. We might say that God does nothing without prayer. His
   most gracious purposes are conditioned on prayer. His marvelous
   promises in Ezekiel 36 are subject to this qualification and condition:
   "Thus saith the Lord God: I will yet for this be inquired of by the
   house of Israel to do it for them."

   In the second Psalm the purposes of God to His enthroned Christ are
   decreed on prayer, as has been previously quoted. That decree which
   promises to Him the heathen for His inheritance relies on prayer for
   its fulfillment: "Ask of me." We see how sadly the decree has failed in
   its operation, not because of the weakness of God's purpose, but by the
   weakness of man's praying. It takes God's mighty decree and man's
   mighty praying to bring to pass these glorious results.

   In the seventy-second Psalm, we have an insight into the mighty
   potencies of prayer as the force which God moves on the conquest of
   Christ: "Prayer shall be made for him continually." (Psalm 72:15). In this statement
   Christ's movements are put into the hands of prayer.

   When Christ, with a sad and sympathising heart, looked upon the ripened
   fields of humanity, and saw the great need of labourers, His purposes
   were for more labourers, and so He charged them, "Pray ye therefore the
   Lord of the harvest that he will send forth labourers into his
   harvest." (Matt 9:38).

   In Ephes. 3, Paul reminds those believers of the eternal purposes of
   God, and how he was bowing his knees to God in order that that eternal
   purpose might be accomplished, and also that they "might be filled with
   all the fullness of God." (Eph 3:19).

   We see in Job how God conditioned His purposes for Job's three friends
   on Job's praying, and God's purposes in regard to Job were brought
   about by the same means.

   In the first part of Rev. 8 the relation and necessity of saintly
   prayers to God's plans and operations in executing the salvation of men
   is set forth in rich, expressive symbol, wherein the angels have to do
   with the prayers of the saints.

   Prayer gives efficiency and utility to the promises. The mighty ongoing
   of God's purposes rests on prayer. The representatives of the Church in
   Heaven and of all creation before the throne of God "have every one of
   them golden vials of odours which are the prayers of the saints." (Rev 5:8).

   We have said before, and repeat it, that prayer is based not simply
   upon a promise, but on a relationship. The returning penitent sinner
   prays on a promise. The Child of God prays on the relation of a child.
   What the father has belongs to the child for present and prospective
   uses. The child asks, the father gives. The relationship is one of
   asking and answering, of giving and receiving. The child is dependent
   upon the father, must look to the father, must ask of the father, and
   must receive of the father.

   We know how with earthly parents asking and giving belong to this
   relation, and how in the very act of asking and giving, the
   relationship of parent and child is cemented, sweetened and enriched.
   The parent finds his wealth of pleasure and satisfaction in giving to
   an obedient child, and the child finds his wealth in the father's
   loving and continuous giving.

   Prayer affects God more powerfully than His own purposes. God's will,
   words and purposes are all subject to review when the mighty potencies
   of prayer come in. How mighty prayer is with God may be seen as he
   readily sets aside His own fixed and declared purposes in answer to
   prayer. The whole plan of salvation had been blocked had Jesus Christ
   prayed for the twelve legions of angels to carry dismay and ruin to His
   enemies.

   The fasting and prayers of the Ninevites changed Gods purposes to
   destroy that wicked city. after Jonah had gone there and cried unto the
   people, "Yet forty days and Ninevah shall be destroyed." (Jonah 3:4).

   Almighty God is concerned in our praying. He wills it, He commands it,
   He inspires it. Jesus Christ in Heaven is ever praying. Prayer is His
   law and His life. The Holy Spirit teaches us how to pray. He prays for
   us "with groanings which cannot be uttered." (Rom 8:26). All these show the deep
   concern of God in prayer. It discloses very dearly how vital it is to
   His work in this world, and how far-reaching are its possibilities.
   Prayer forms the very center of the heart and will of God concerning
   men. "Rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing, and in everything give
   thanks. For this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you." (1 Thess 5:18).
   Prayer is the pole star around which rejoicing and thanksgiving
   revolve. Prayer is the heart sending its full and happy pulsations up
   to God through the glad currents of joy and thanksgiving.

   By prayer God's Name is hallowed. By prayer God's kingdom comes. By
   prayer is His kingdom established in power and made to move with
   conquering force swifter than the light. By prayer God's will is done
   till earth rivals Heaven in harmony and beauty. By prayer daily toil is
   sanctified and enriched, and pardon is secured, and Satan is defeated.
   Prayer concerns God, and concerns man in every way.

   God has nothing too good to give in answer to prayer. There is no
   vengeance pronounced by God so dire which does not yield to prayer.
   There is no justice so flaming that is not quenched by prayer.

   Take the record and attitude of Heaven against Saul of Tarsus. That
   attitude is changed and that record is erased when the astonishing
   condition is announced, "Behold he prayeth." (Acts 9:11).  The recreant Jonah is
   alive, and on dry ground, with scarce the taste of the sea or the smell
   of its weeds about him, as he prays. "Out of the belly of hell cried I,
   and thou heardst my voice."

   "The waters compassed me about, even to the soul; the depth closed me
   round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head.

   "I went down to the bottoms of the mountains; the earth with her bars
   was about me for ever; yet hast thou brought up my life from
   corruption, O Lord my God.

   "When my soul fainted within me I remembered the Lord: and my prayer
   came in unto thee, into thine holy temple.

   "And the Lord spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the
   dry land." (Jonah 2:2-10).

   Prayer has all the force of God in it. Prayer can get anything which
   God has. Thus prayer has all of its plea and its claim in the name of
   Jesus Christ, and there is nothing too good or great for God to give
   that name.

   It must be borne in mind that there is no test surer than this thing of
   prayer of our being in the family of God. God's children pray. They
   repose in Him for all things. They ask Him for all things--for
   everything. The faith of the child in the father is evinced by the
   child's asking. It is the answer to prayer which convinces men not only
   that there is a God, but that He is a God who concerns Himself about
   men, and about the affairs of this world. Answered prayer brings God
   nigh, and assures men of His being. Answered prayer is the credentials
   of our relation to and our representative of Him. Men cannot represent
   God who do not get answers to prayer from Him.

   The possibilities of prayer are found in the illimitable promise, the
   willingness and the power of God to answer prayer, to answer all
   prayer, to answer every prayer, and to supply fully the illimitable
   need of man. None are so needy as man, none are so able and anxious to
   supply every need and any need as God.

   Preaching should no more fully declare and fulfill the will of God for
   the salvation of all men, than should the prayers of God's saints
   declare the same great truth' as they wrestle in their closet for this
   sublime end. God's heart is set on the salvation of all men. This
   concerns God. He has declared this in the death of His Son by an
   unspeakable voice, and every movement on earth for this end pleases
   God. And so He declares that our prayers for the salvation of all men
   are well pleasing in His sight. The sublime and holy inspiration of
   pleasing God should ever move us to prayer for all men. God eyes the
   closet, and nothing we can do pleases Him better than our
   large-hearted, ardent praying for all men. It is the embodiment and
   test of our devotion to God's will and of our sympathetic loyalty to
   God.

   In 1 Tim. 2:13 the apostle Paul does not descend to a low plane, but
   presses the necessity of prayer by the most forceful facts. Jesus
   Christ, a man, the God-man, the highest illustration of manhood, is the
   Mediator between God and man. Jesus Christ, this Divine man, died for
   all men. His life is but an intercession for all men. His death is but
   a prayer for all men. On earth, Jesus Christ knew no higher law, no
   holier business, no diviner life, than to plead for men. In Heaven He
   knows no more royal estate, no higher theme, than to intercede for men.
   On earth He lived and prayed and died for men. His life, His death and
   His exaltation in Heaven all plead for men.

   Is there any work, higher work for the disciple to do than His Lord
   did? Is there any loftier employment, more honourable, more divine,
   than to pray for men? To take their woes, their sins, and their perils
   before God; to be one with Christ? To break the thrall which binds
   them, the hell which holds them and lift them to immortality and
   eternal life?
     __________________________________________________________________

V. JESUS CHRIST, THE DIVINE TEACHER OF PRAYER

   A friend of mine in his journey is come to me, and I have nothing to
   set before him! He knocks again. "Friend! lend me three loaves?" He
   waits a while and then knocks again. "Friend! I must have three
   loaves!" "Trouble me not: the door is now shut; I cannot rise and give
   thee!" He stands still. He turns to go home. He comes back. He knocks
   again. "Friend!" he cries. He puts his ear to the door. There is a
   sound inside, and then the light of a candle shines through the hole of
   the door. The bars of the door are drawn back, and he gets not three
   loaves only, but as many as he needs. "And I say unto you, Ask and it
   shall be given you; seek and ye shall find; knock and it shall be
   opened unto you."--Alexander Whyte, D.D.

   Jesus Christ was the Divine Teacher of prayer. Its power and nature had
   been illustrated by many a saint and prophet in olden times, but modern
   sainthood and modern teachers of prayer had lost their inspiration and
   life. Religiously dead,[ ]teachers and superficial ecclesiastics had
   forgotten what it was to pray. They did much of saying prayers, on
   state occasions, in public, with much ostentation and parade, but pray
   they did not. To them it was almost a lost practice. In the
   multiplicity of saying prayers they had lost the art of praying.

   The history of the disciples during the earthly life of our Lord was
   not marked with much devotion. They were much enamoured by their
   personal association with Christ. They were charmed by His words,
   excited by His miracles, and were entertained and concerned by the
   hopes which a selfish interest aroused in His person and mission. Taken
   up with the superficial and worldly views of His character, they
   neglected and overlooked the deeper and weightier things which belonged
   to Him and His mission. The neglect of the most obliging and ordinary
   duties by them was a noticeable feature in their conduct. So evident
   and singular was their conduct in this regard, that it became a matter
   of grave inquiry on one occasion and severe chiding on another.

   "And they said unto him, Why do the disciples of John fast often, and
   make prayers, and likewise the disciples of the Pharisees; but thine
   eat and drink? And he said unto them, Can ye make the children of the
   bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? But the days will
   come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall
   they fast in those days." (Luke 5:33-35)

   In the example and the teaching of Jesus Christ, prayer assumes its
   normal relation to God's person, God's movements and God's Son. Jesus
   Christ was essentially the teacher of prayer by precept and example. We
   have glimpses of His praying which, like indices, tell how full of
   prayer the pages, chapters and volumes of His life were. The epitome
   which covers not one segment only, but the whole circle of His life,
   and character, is pre-eminently that of prayer! "In the days of his
   flesh," the Divine record reads, "when he had offered up prayers and
   supplications, with strong crying and tears." (heb 5:7).  The suppliant of all
   suppliants He was, the intercessor of all intercessors. In lowliest
   form He approached God, and with strongest pleas He prayed and
   supplicated.

   Jesus Christ teaches the importance of prayer by His urgency to His
   disciples to pray. But He shows us more than that. He shows how far
   prayer enters into the purposes of God. We must ever keep in mind that
   the relation of Jesus Christ to God is the relation of asking and
   giving, the Son ever asking, the Father ever giving. We must never
   forget that God has put the conquering, inheriting and expanding forces
   of Christ's cause in prayer. "ask of me, and I will give thee the
   heathen for thy inheritance, and the uttermost part of the earth for
   thy possession." (Psalm 2:8).

   This was the clause embodying the royal proclamation and the universal
   condition when the Son was enthroned as the world's Mediator, and when
   He was sent on His mission of receiving grace and power. We very
   naturally learn from this how Jesus would stress praying as the one
   sole condition of His receiving His possession and inheritance.

   Necessarily in this study on prayer, lines of thought will cross each
   other, and the same Scripture passage or incident will be mentioned
   more than once, simply because a passage may teach one or more truths.
   This is the case when we speak of the vast comprehensiveness of prayer.
   How all-inclusive Jesus Christ makes prayer! It has no limitations in
   extent or things! The promises to prayer are Godlike in their
   magnificence, wideness and universality. In their nature these promises
   have to do with God--with Him in their inspiration, creation and
   results. Who but God could say, "All things whatsoever ye ask in
   prayer, believing, ye shall receive?" (Matt 21:22).  Who can command and direct "All
   things whatsoever" but God? Neither man nor chance nor the law of
   results are so far lifted above change, limitations or condition, nor
   have in them mighty forces which can direct and result all things, as
   to promise the bestowment and direction of all things.

   Whole sections, parables and incidents were used by Christ to enforce
   the necessity and importance of prayer. His miracles are but parables
   of prayer. In nearly all of them prayer figures distinctly, and some
   features of it are illustrated. The Syrophoenician woman is a
   pre-eminent illustration of the ability and the success of importunity
   in prayer. The case of blind Bartimaeus has points of suggestion along
   the same line. Jairus and the Centurion illustrate and impress phases
   of prayer. The parable of the Pharisee and the publican enforce
   humility in prayer, declare the wondrous results of praying, and show
   the vanity and worthlessness of wrong praying. The failure to enforce
   church discipline and the readiness of violating the brotherhood, are
   all used to make an exhibit of far-reaching results of agreed praying,
   a record of which we have in Matthew 18:19.

   It is of prayer in concert that Christ is speaking. Two agreed ones,
   two whose hearts have been keyed into perfect symphony by the Holy
   Spirit. Anything that they shall ask, it shall be done. Christ had been
   speaking of discipline in the Church, how things were to be kept in
   unity, and how the fellowship of the brethren was to be maintained, by
   the restoration of the offender or by his exclusion. Members who had
   been true to the brotherhood of Christ, and who were laboring to
   preserve that brotherhood unbroken, would be the agreed ones to make
   appeals to God in united prayer.

   In the Sermon on the Mount, Christ lays down constitutional principles.
   Types and shadows are retired, and the law of spiritual life is
   declared. In this foundation law of the Christian system prayer assumes
   a conspicuous, if not a paramount, position It is not only wide,
   all-commanding and comprehensive in its own sphere of action and
   relief, but it is ancillary to all duties. Even the one demanding
   kindly and discriminating judgment toward others, and also the royal
   injunction, the Golden Rule of action, these owe their being to prayer.

   Christ puts prayer among the statutory promises. He does not leave it
   to natural law. The law of need, demand and supply, of helplessness, of
   natural instincts, or the law of sweet, high, attractive
   privilege--these howsoever strong as motives of action, are not the
   basis of praying. Christ puts it as spiritual law. Men must pray. Not
   to pray is not simply a privation, an omission, but a positive
   violation of law, of spiritual life, a crime, bringing disorder and
   ruin. Prayer is law world-wide and eternity-reaching.

   In the Sermon on the Mount many important utterances are dismissed with
   a line or a verse, while the subject of prayer occupies a large space.
   To it Christ returns again and again. He bases the possibilities and
   necessities of prayer on the relation of father and child, the child
   crying for bread, and the father giving that for which the child asks.
   Prayer and its answer are in the relation of a father to his child. The
   teaching of Jesus Christ on the nature and necessity of prayer as
   recorded in His life, is remarkable. He sends men to their closets.
   Prayer must be a holy exercise, untainted by vanity, or pride. It must
   be in secret. The disciple must live in secret. God lives there, is
   sought there and is found there. The command of Christ as to prayer is
   that pride and publicity should be shunned. Prayer is to be in private.
   "But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and shut thy door,
   and pray to thy Father in secret. And thy Father, which seeth in
   secret, shall reward thee openly." (Matt 6:6).

   The Beatitudes are not only to enrich and adorn, but they are the
   material out of which spiritual character is built. The very first one
   of these fixes prayer in the very foundation of spiritual character,
   not simply to adorn, but to compose. "Blessed are the poor in spirit." (Matt 5:3).
   The word "poor" means a pauper, one who lives by begging. The real
   Christian lives on the bounties of another, whose bounties he gets by
   asking. Prayer then becomes the basis of Christian character, the
   Christian's business, his life and his living. This is Christ's law of
   prayer, putting it into the very being of the Christian. It is his
   first step, and his first breath, which is to color and to form all his
   after life. Blessed are the poor ones, for they only can pray.

   Prayer is the Christian's vital breath,

   The Christian's native air;

   His watchword at the gates of death;

   He enters Heaven with prayer.

   From praying Christ eliminates all self-sufficiency, all pride; and all
   spiritual values. The poor in spirit are the praying ones. Beggars are
   God's princes. They are God's heirs. Christ removes the rubbish of
   Jewish traditions and glosses from the regulations of the prayer altar.

   "Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not
   kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment:

   "But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother shall be
   in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother,
   Raca, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, thou
   fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

   "Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar and there rememberest
   that thy brother has aught against thee:

   "Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first, be
   reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift." (Matt 5:21-23).

   He who essays to pray to God with an angry spirit, with loose and
   irreverent lips, with an irreconciled heart, and with unsettled
   neighbourly scores, spends his labour for that which is worse than
   naught, violates the law of prayer, and adds to his sin.

   How rigidly exacting is Christ's law of prayer! It goes to the heart,
   and demands that love be enthroned there, love to the brotherhood. The
   sacrifice of prayer must be seasoned and perfumed with love, by love in
   the inward parts. The law of prayer, its creator and inspirer, is love.

   Praying must be done. God wants it done. He commands it. Man needs it
   and man must do it. Something must surely come of praying, for God
   engages that something shall come out of it, if men are in earnest and
   are persevering in prayer.

   After Jesus teaches "Ask and it shall be given you," etc., He
   encourages real praying, and more praying. He repeats and avers with
   redoubled assurance, " for every one that asketh receiveth." (Matt 7:8).  No
   exception. "Every one." "He that seeketh, findeth." Here it is again,
   sealed and stamped with infinite veracity. Then closed and signed, as
   well as sealed, with Divine attestation, "To him that knocketh it shall
   be opened." Note how we are encouraged to pray by our relation to God!

   "If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
   children, how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven give good
   things to them that ask him?" (Matt 7:11).

   The relation of prayer to God's work and God's rule in this world is
   most fully illustrated by Jesus Christ in both His teaching and His
   practice. He is first in every way and in everything. Among the rulers
   of the Church He is primary in a pre-eminent way. He has the throne.
   The golden crown is His in eminent preciousness. The white garments
   enrobe Him in pre-eminent whiteness and beauty. In the ministry of
   prayer He is a Divine example as well as the Divine Teacher. His
   example is affluent, and His prayer teaching abounds. How imperative
   the teaching of our Lord when He affirms that "men ought always to pray
   and not to faint!" (Luke 18:1) and then presents a striking parable of an unjust
   judge and a poor widow to illustrate and enforce His teaching. It is a
   necessity to pray. It is exacting and binding for men always to be in
   prayer. Courage, endurance and perseverance are demanded that men may
   never faint in prayer. "And shall not God avenge his own elect that cry
   day and night unto him?" (Luke 18:7).

   This is His strong and indignant questioning and affirmation. Men must
   pray according to Christ's teaching. They must not get tired nor grow
   weary in praying. God's character is the assured surety that much will
   come of the persistent praying of true men.

   Doubtless the praying of our Lord had much to do with the revelation
   made to Peter and the confession he made to Christ, "Thou art the
   Christ, the Son of the Living god." (Matt 16:16).  Prayer mightily affects and moulds
   the circle of our associates. Christ made disciples and kept them
   disciples by praying. His twelve disciples were much impressed by His
   praying. Never man prayed like this man. How different His praying from
   the cold, proud, self-righteous praying which they heard and saw on the
   streets, in the synagogue, and in the Temple.
     __________________________________________________________________

VI. JESUS CHRIST, THE DIVINE TEACHER OF PRAYER (Continued)

   Luke tells us that as Jesus was praying in a certain place, when He
   ceased, one of His disciples said unto Him, "Lord, teach us to pray." (Luke 11:1).
   This disciple had heard Jesus preach, but did not feel like saying,
   "Lord, teach us to preach." He could learn to preach by studying the
   methods of the Master. But there was something about the praying of
   Jesus that made the disciple feel that he did not know how to pray;
   that he had never prayed, and that he could not learn by listening even
   to the Master as He prayed. There is a profound something about prayer
   which never lies upon the surface. To learn it, one must go to the
   depths of the soul, and climb to the heights of God.--A. C. Dixon, D.D.

   Let it not be forgotten that prayer was one of the great truths which
   He came into the world to teach and illustrate. It was worth a trip
   from Heaven to earth to teach men this great lesson of prayer. A great
   lesson it was, a very difficult lesson for men to learn. Men are
   naturally averse to learning this lesson of prayer. The lesson is a
   very lowly one. None but God can teach it. It is a despised beggary, a
   sublime and heavenly vocation. The disciples were very stupid scholars,
   but were quickened to prayer by hearing Him pray and talk about prayer.

   The dispensation of Christ's personality, while it was not and could
   not be the dispensation in its fullest and highest sense of need and
   dependence, yet Christ did try to impress on His disciples not alone a
   deep necessity of the necessity of prayer in general, but the
   importance of prayer to them in their personal and spiritual needs. And
   there came moments to them when they felt the need of a deeper and more
   thorough schooling in prayer and of their grave neglect in this regard.
   One of these hours of deep conviction on their part and of eager
   inquiry was when He was praying at a certain place and time, and they
   saw Him, and they said to Him, "Lord, teach us to pray, as John also
   taught his disciples."

   As they listened to Him praying, they felt very keenly their ignorance
   and deficiency in praying. Who has not felt the same deficiency and
   ignorance? Who has not longed for a teacher in the Divine art of
   praying?

   The conviction which these twelve men had of their defect in prayer
   arose from hearing their Lord and Master pray, but likewise from a
   sense of serious defect even when compared with John the Baptist's
   training of his disciples in prayer. As they listened to their Lord
   pray (for unquestionably He must have been seen and heard by them as He
   prayed, who prayed with marvelous simplicity, and power, so human and
   so Divine) such praying had a stimulating charm for them. In the
   presence and hearing of His praying, very keenly they felt their
   ignorance and deficiency in prayer. Who has not felt the same ignorance
   and deficiency?

   We do not regret the schooling our Lord gave these twelve men, for in
   schooling them He schools us. The lesson is one already learned in the
   law of Christ. But so dull were they, that many a patient iteration and
   reiteration was required to instruct them in this Divine art of prayer.
   And likewise so dull are we and inapt that many a wearying patient
   repetition must be given us before we will learn any important lesson
   in the all-important school of prayer.

   This Divine Teacher of prayer lays Himself out to make it clear and
   strong that God answers prayer, assuredly, certainly, inevitably; that
   it is the duty of the child to ask, and to press, and that the Father
   is obliged to answer, and to give for the asking. In Christ's teaching,
   prayer isno sterile, vain performance, not a mere rite, a form, but a
   request for an answer, a plea to gain, the seeking of a great good from
   God. It is a lesson of getting that for which we ask, of finding that
   for which we seek, and of entering the door at which we knock.

   A notable occasion we have as Jesus comes down from the Mount of
   Transfiguration. He finds His disciples defeated, humiliated and
   confused in the presence of their enemies. A father has brought his
   child possessed with a demon to have the demon cast out. They essayed
   to do it but failed. They had been commissioned by Jesus and sent to do
   that very work, but had signally failed. "And when he was come into the
   house, his disciples asked him privately, saying, Why could not we cast
   him out? And he said unto them, This kind can come forth by nothing but
   by prayer and fasting." (Mark 9:28).  Their faith had not been cultured by prayer.
   They failed in prayer before they failed in ability to do their work.
   They failed in faith because they had failed in prayer. That one thing
   which was necessary to do God's work was prayer. The work which God
   sends us to do cannot be done without prayer.

   In Christ's teaching on prayer we have another pertinent statement. It
   was in connection with the cursing of the barren fig tree:

   "Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, if ye have
   faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to the
   fig tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed
   and be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done.

   "And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall
   receive." (Matthew 21:21-22).

   In this passage we have faith and prayer, their possibilities and
   powers conjoined. A fig tree had been blasted to the roots by the word
   of the Lord Jesus. The power and quickness of the result surprised the
   disciples. Jesus says to them that it need be no surprise to them or
   such a difficult work to be done. "If ye have faith" its possibilities
   to affect will not be confined to the little fig tree, but the
   gigantic, rock-ribbed, rock-founded mountains can be uprooted and moved
   into the sea. Prayer is leverage of this great power of faith.

   It is well to refer again to the occasion when the heart of our Lord
   was so deeply moved with compassion as he beheld the multitudes because
   they fainted and were scattered as having no shepherd. Then it was He
   urged upon His disciples the injunction, "Pray ye the Lord of the
   harvest that he would send forth labourers into his harvest," (Matthew 9:38) dearly
   teaching them that it belonged to God to call into the ministry men
   whom He will, and that in answer to prayer the Holy Spirit does this
   very work.

   Prayer is as necessary now as it was then to secure the needed
   labourers to reap earthly harvests for the heavenly garners. Has the
   Church of God ever learned this lesson of so vital and exacting import?
   God alone can choose the labourers and thrust them out, and this
   choosing He does not delegate to man, or church, convocation or synod,
   association or conference. And God is moved to this great work of
   calling men into the ministry by prayer. Earthly fields are rotting.
   They are untilled because prayer is silent. The labourers are few.
   Fields are unworked because prayer has not worked with God.

   We have the prayer promise and the prayer ability put in a distinct
   form in the higher teachings of prayer by our Lord: "If ye abide in me,
   and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be
   done unto you." (John 15:7).

   Here we have a fixed attitude of life as the condition of prayer. Not
   simply a fixed attitude of life toward some great principles or
   purposes, but the fixed attitude and unity of life with Jesus Christ.
   To live in Him, to dwell there, to be one with Him, to draw all life
   from Him, to let all life from Him flow through us--this is the
   attitude of prayer and the ability to pray. No abiding in Him can be
   separated from His Word abiding in us. It must live in us to give birth
   to and food for prayer. The attitude of the Person of Christ is the
   condition of prayer.

   The Old Testament saints had been taught that "God had magnified his
   word above all his name." (Psalm 138:2).  New Testament saints must learn fully how to
   exalt by perfect obedience that Word issuing from the lips of Him who
   is the Word. Praying ones under Christ must learn what praying ones
   under Moseshad already learned, that "man shall not live by bread
   alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." (Matt 4:4).  The
   life of Christ flowing through us and the words of Christ living in us,
   these give potency to prayer. They breathe the spirit of prayer, and
   make the body, blood and bones of prayer. Then it is Christ praying in
   me and through me, and all things which "I will" are the will of God.
   My will becomes the law and the answer, for it is written "Ye shall ask
   what ye will, and it shall be done unto you." (John 15:7).

   Fruit bearing our Lord puts to the front in our praying:

   "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that
   ye shall go and bring forth fruit and that your fruit shall remain,
   that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it
   you." (John 15:16).

   Barrenness cannot pray. Fruit bearing capacity and reality only can
   pray. It is not past fruitfulness, but present: "That your fruit should
   remain." Fruit, the product of life, is the condition of praying. A
   life vigourous enough to bear fruit, much fruit, is the condition and
   the source of prayer. "And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily,
   verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name,
   he will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask and
   ye shall receive, that your joy may be full." (John 16:23-24).  "In that day ye shall ask
   me nothing." It is not solving riddles, not revealing mysteries, not
   curious questionings. This is not our attitude, not our business under
   the Dispensation of the Spirit, but to pray, and to pray largely. Much
   true praying increases man's joy and God's glory.

   "Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, I will give," says Christ, and the
   Father will give. Both Father and Son are pledged to give the very
   things for which we ask. But the condition is "in His name." This does
   not mean that His name is talismanic, to give value by magic. It does
   not mean that His name in beautiful settings of pearl will give value
   to prayer. It is not that His name perfumed with sentiment and larded
   in and closing up our prayers and doings will do the deed How fearful
   the statement: "Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we
   not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name cast out devils? and in thy
   name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I
   never knew you. Depart from me, ye that work iniquity." (Matthew 7:22).  How blasting
   the doom of these great workers and doers who claim to work in His
   name!

   It means far more than sentiment, verbiage, and nomenclature. It means
   to stand in His stead, to bear His nature, to stand for all for which
   He stood, for righteousness, truth, holiness and zeal. It means to be
   one with God as He was, one in spirit, in will and in purpose. It means
   that our praying is singly and solely for God's glory through His Son.
   It means that we abide in Him, that Christ prays through us, lives in
   us and shines out of us; that we pray by the Holy Spirit according to
   the will of God.

   Even amid the darkness of Gethsemane, with the stupor which had settled
   upon the disciples, we have the sharp warning from Christ to His
   sluggish disciples, "Watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation. The
   spirit truly is willing, but the flesh is weak." (Matthew 26:41).  How needful to hear
   such a warning, to awaken all our powers, not simply for the great
   crises of our lives, but as the inseparable and constant attendants of
   a career marked with perils and dangers on every hand.

   As Christ nears the close of His earthly mission, nearer to the greater
   and more powerful dispensation of the Spirit, His teaching about prayer
   takes on a more absorbing and higher form. It has now become a
   graduating school. His connection with prayer becomes more intimate and
   more absolute. He becomes in prayer what He is in all else pertaining
   to our salvation, the beginning and the end, the first and the last.
   His name becomes all potent. Mighty works are to be done by the faith
   which can pray in His name. Like His nature, His name covers all needs,
   embraces all worlds, and gets all good.

   "Believest thou not that I am in the Father and the Father in me? The
   words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that
   dwelleth in me, he doeth the works.

   "Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father in me: or else
   believe me for the very works' sake.

   "Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works
   that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do;
   because I go unto my Father.

   "And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the
   Father may be glorified in the Son.

   "If ye shall ask anything in my name I will do it." (John 14:10-14).

   The Father, the Son and the praying one are all bound up together. All
   things are in Christ, and all things are in prayer in His name. "If ye
   shall ask anything in my name." The key which unlocks the vast
   storehouse of God is prayer. The power to do greater works than Christ
   did lies in the faith which can grasp His name truly and in true
   praying.

   In the last of His life, note how He urges prayer as a preventive of
   the many evils to which they were exposed. In view of the temporal and
   fearful terrors of the destruction of Jerusalem, He charges them to
   this effect: "Pray ye that your flight be not in winter." (Matthew 24:20).

   How many evils in this life which can be escaped by prayer! How many
   fearful temporal calamities can be mitigated, if not wholly relieved,
   by prayer! Notice how, amid the excesses and stupefying influences to
   which we are exposed in this world, Christ charges us to pray:

   "And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be
   overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life,
   and so that day come upon you unawares.

   "For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the
   whole earth.

   "Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to
   escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before
   the Son of man." (Luke 21:34-36).

   In view of the uncertainty of Christ's coming to judgment, and the
   uncertainty of our going out of this world, He says: "But of that day
   and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in Heaven,
   neither the Son, but the Father. Take ye heed, watch and pray, for ye
   know not when the time is." (Mark 13:32-33).

   We have the words of Jesus as given in His last interview with His
   twelve disciples, found in the Gospel of John, chapters fourteen to
   seventeen, inclusive. These are true, solemn parting words. The
   disciples were to move out into the regions of toil, and peril, bereft
   of the personal presence of their Lord and Master. They were to be
   impressed that prayer would serve them in everything, and its use, and
   unlimited possibilities would in some measure supply their loss, and by
   it they would be able to command all the possibilities of Jesus Christ
   and God the Father.

   It was the occasion of momentous interest to Jesus Christ. His work was
   to receive its climax and crown in His death and His resurrection. His
   glory and the success of His work and of its execution, under the
   mastery and direction of the Holy Spirit, was to be committed to His
   apostles. To them it was an hour of strange wonderment and of peculiar,
   mysterious sorrow, only too well assured of the fact that Jesus was to
   leave them. All else was dark and impalpable.

   He was to give them His parting words and pray His parting prayer.
   Solemn, vital truths were to be the weight and counsel of that hour. He
   speaks to them of Heaven. Young men, strong though they were, yet they
   could not meet the duties of their preaching life and their apostolic
   life, without the fact, the thought, the hope and the relish of Heaven.
   These things were to be present constantly in all sweetness, in all
   their vigour, in all freshness, in all brightness. He spoke to them
   about their spiritual and conscious connection with Himself, an abiding
   indwelling, so close and continuous that His own life would flow into
   them, as the life of the vine flows into the branches. Their lives and
   their fruitfulness were dependent upon this. Then praying was urged
   upon them as one of the vital, essential forces. This was the one thing
   upon which all the Divine force depended, and this was the avenue and
   agency through which the Divine life and power were to be secured and
   continued in their ministry.

   He spake to them about prayer. He had taught them many lessons upon
   this all-important subject as they had been together. This solemn hour
   he seizes to perfect his teaching. They must be made to realize that
   they have an illimitable and exhaustless storehouse of good in God and
   that they can draw on Him at all times and for all things without
   stint, as Paul said in after years to the Philippians, "My God shall
   supply all your need according to His riches in glory by Christ Jesus." (Phil 4:19).
     __________________________________________________________________

VII. JESUS CHRIST AN EXAMPLE OF PRAYER

   Christ, when He saw that He must die, and that nowHis time was come, He
   wore His body out: He cared not, as it were, what became of Him: He
   wholly spent Himself in preaching all day, and in praying all night,
   preaching in the temple those terrible parables and praying in the
   garden such prayers, as the seventeenth of John, and "Thy will be
   done!" even to a bloody sweat.--Thomas Goodwin.

   The Bible record of the life of Jesus Christ gives but a glance of His
   busy doing, a small selection of His many words, and only a brief
   record of His great works. But even in this record we see Him as being
   much in prayer. Even though busy and exhausted by the severe strain and
   toils of His lift, "in the morning a great while before day, he rose up
   and went out and departed into a desert place, and there prayed." (Mark 1:35). Alone
   in the desert and in the darkness with God! Prayer filled the life of
   our Lord while on earth. His life was a constant stream of incense
   sweet and perfumed by prayer. When we see how the life of Jesus was but
   one of prayer, then we must conclude that to be like Jesus is to pray
   like Jesus and is to live like Jesus. A serious life it is to pray as
   Jesus prayed.

   We cannot follow any chronological order in the praying of Jesus
   Christ. What were His steps of advance and skill in the Divine art of
   praying we know not. He is in the act of prayer when we find Him at the
   fords of the Jordan, when the waters of baptism, at the hands of John
   the Baptist, are upon Him. So passing over the three years of His
   ministry, when closing the drama of His life in that terrible baptism
   of fear, pain, suffering, and shame, we find Him in the spirit, and
   also in the very act of praying. The baptism of the Cross, as well as
   the baptism of the Jordan, are sanctified by prayer. With the breath of
   prayer in His last sigh, He commits His spirit to God. In His first
   recorded utterances, as well as His first acts, we find Him teaching
   His disciples how to pray as His first lesson, and as their first duty.
   Under the shadow of the Cross, in the urgency and importance of His
   last interview with His chosen disciples, He is at the same
   all-important business, teaching the world's teachers how to pray,
   trying to make prayerful those lips and hearts out of which were to
   flow the Divine deposits of truth.

   The great eras of His life were created and crowned with prayer. What
   were His habits of prayer during His stay at home and His toil as a
   carpenter in Nazareth, we have no means of knowing. God has veiled it,
   and guess and speculation are not only vain and misleading, but proud
   and prurient. It would be presumptuous searching into that which God
   has hidden, which would make us seek to be wise above that which was
   written, trying to lift up the veil with which God has covered His own
   revelation.

   We find Christ in the presence of the famed, the prophet and the
   preacher. He has left His Nazareth home and His carpenter shop by God's
   call. He is now at a transitional point. He has moved out to His great
   work. John's baptism and the baptism of the Holy Ghost are prefatory
   and are to qualify Him for that work. This epochal and transitional
   period is marked by prayer.

   "Now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass that Jesus,
   being also baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened.

   "And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him,
   and a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son; in
   thee I am well pleased." (Luke 3:21-22).

   It is a supreme hour in His history, different and in striking contrast
   with, but not in opposition to, the past. The descent and abiding of
   the Holy Spirit in all His fullness, the opening heavens, and the
   attesting voice which involved God's recognition of His only Son--all
   these are the result, if not the direct creation and response to His
   praying on that occasion.

   "As He was praying," (Luke 9:29) so we are to be praying. If we would pray as
   Christ prayed, we must be as Christ was, and must live as Christ lived.
   The Christ character, the Christ life, and the Christ spirit, must be
   ours if we would do the Christ praying, and would have our prayers
   answered as He had His prayers answered. The business of Christ even
   now in Heaven at His Father's right hand is to pray. Certainly if we
   are His, if we love Him, if we live for Him, and if we live close to
   Him, we will catch the contagion of His praying life, both on earth and
   in Heaven. We will learn His trade and carry on His business on earth.

   Jesus Christ loved all men, He tasted death for all men, He intercedes
   for all men. Let us ask then, are we the imitators, the
   representatives, and the executors of Jesus Christ? Then must we in our
   prayers run parallel with His atonement in its extent. The atoning
   blood of Jesus Christ gives sanctity and efficiency to our prayers. As
   worldwide, as broad, and as human as the man Christ Jesus was, so must
   be our prayers. The intercessions of Christ's people must give currency
   and expedition to the work of Christ, carry the atoning blood to its
   benignant ends, and help to strike off the chains of sin from every
   ransomed soul. We must be as praying, as tearful, and as compassionate
   as was Christ.

   Prayer affects all things. God blesses the person who prays. He who
   prays goes out on a long voyage for God and is enriched himself while
   enriching others, and is blessed himself while the world is blessed by
   his praying. To "live a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
   honesty" (1 Tim 2:2) is the wealthiest wealth.

   The praying of Christ was real. No man prayed as He prayed. Prayer
   pressed upon Him as a solemn, all-imperative, all-commanding duty, as
   well as a royal privilege in which all sweetness was condensed,
   alluring and absorbing. Prayer was the secret of His power, the law of
   His life, the inspiration of His toil and the source of His wealth, His
   joy, His communion and His strength.

   To Christ Jesus prayer occupied no secondary place, but was exacting
   and paramount, a necessity, a life, the satisfying of a restless
   yearning and a preparation for heavy responsibilities.

   Closeting with His Father in counsel and fellowship, with vigour and in
   deep joy, all this was His praying. Present trials, future glory, the
   history of His Church, and the struggles and perils of His disciples in
   all times and to the very end of time--all these things were born and
   shaped by His praying.

   Nothing is more conspicuous in the life of our Lord than prayer. His
   campaigns were arranged and His victories were gained in the struggles
   and communion of His all night praying. By prayer He rent the heavens.
   Moses and Elijah and the transfiguration glory wait on His praying. His
   miracles and teaching had their power from the same source.
   Gethsemane's praying crimsoned Calvary with serenity and glory. His
   sacerdotal prayer makes the history and hastens the triumph of His
   Church on earth. What an inspiration and command to pray is the prayer
   life of Jesus Christ while in this world! What a comment it is on the
   value, the nature and the necessity of prayer!

   The dispensation of the Person of Jesus Christ was a dispensation of
   prayer. A synopsis of His teaching and practice of prayer was that "Men
   ought aways to pray and not to faint." (Luke 18:1).

   As the Jews prayed in the name of their patriarchs and invoked the
   privileges granted to them by covenant with God; as we have a new Name
   and a new covenant, more privileged and more powerful and more
   all-comprehensive, more authoritative and more Divine; and as far as
   the Son of God is lifted above the patriarchs in divinity, glory and
   power, by so much should our praying exceed theirs in range of
   largeness, glory and power of results.

   Jesus Christ prayed to God as Father. Simply and directly did He
   approach God in the charmed and revered circle of the Father. The
   awful, repelling fear was entirely absent, lost in the supreme
   confidence of a child.

   Jesus Christ crowns His life, His works and His teaching with prayer.
   How His Father attests His relationship and puts on Him the glory of
   answered prayer at His Baptism and Transfiguration when all other
   glories are growing dim in the night which settles on Him! What
   almighty potencies are in prayer when we are charged and surcharged
   with but one inspiration and aim! "Father, glorify thy name." (John 12:28). This
   sweetens all, brightens all, conquers all and gets all. "Father,
   glorify thy name." That guiding star will illumine the darkest night
   and calm the wildest storm and will make us brave and true. An imperial
   principle it is. It will make an imperial Christian.

   The range and potencies of prayer, so clearly shown by Jesus in life
   and teaching, but reveal the great purposes of God. They not only
   reveal the Son in the reality and fullness of His humanity, but also
   reveal the Father.

   Christ prayed as a child. The spirit of a child was found in Him. At
   the grave of Lazarus "Jesus lifted up His eyes and said, Father." (John 11:41).  Again
   we hear Him begin His prayer after this fashion: "In that hour Jesus
   rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O Father." (Luke 10:21).  So also on other
   occasions we find Him in praying addressing God as His Father, assuming
   the attitude of the child asking something of the Father. What
   confidence, simplicity and artlessness! What readiness, freeness and
   fullness of approach are all involved in the spirit of a child! What
   confiding trust, what assurance, what tender interest! What profound
   solicitudes, and tender sympathy on the Father's part! What respect
   deepening into reverence! What loving obedience and grateful emotions
   glow in the child's heart! What Divine fellowship and royal intimacy!
   What sacred and sweet emotions! All these meet in the hour of prayer
   when the child of God meets His Father in Heaven, and when the Father
   meets His child! We must live as children if we would ask as children.
   We must act as children if we would pray as children. The spirit of
   prayer is born of the child spirit.

   The profound reverence in this. relation of paternity must forever
   exclude all lightness, frivolity and pertness, as well as all undue
   familiarity. Solemnity and gravity become the hour of prayer. It has
   been well said: "The worshipper who invokes God under the name of
   Father and realises the gracious and beneficent love of God, must at
   the same time remember and recognise God's glorious majesty, which is
   neither annulled nor impaired, but rather supremely intensified through
   His fatherly love. An appeal to God as Father, if not associated with
   reverence and homage before the Divine Majesty, would betray a want of
   understanding of the character of God." And, we might add, would show a
   lack of the attributes of a child.

   Patriarchs and prophets knew something of the doctrine of the
   Fatherhood of God to God's family. They "saw it afar off, were
   persuaded of it, and embraced it," but understood it not, in all its
   fullness, "God having provided some better thing for us, that they
   without us should not be made perfect."

   "Behold he prayeth!" (Acts 9:11) was God's statement of wonderment and surprise to
   the timid Ananias in regard to Saul of Tarsus. "Behold he prayeth!"
   applied to Christ has in it far more of wonderment and mystery and
   surprise. He, the Maker of all worlds, the Lord of angels and of men,
   co-equal and co-eternal with the Everlasting God; the "brightness of
   the Father's glory and the express image of his person" (Heb 1:3); "fresh from
   his Father's glory and from his Father's throne."--"Behold he prayeth!"
   To find Him in lowly, dependent attitude of prayer, the suppliant of
   all suppliants, His richest legacy and His royal privilege to
   pray--this is the mystery of all mysteries, the wonder of all wonders.

   Paul gives in brief and comprehensive statement the habit of our Lord
   in prayer in Hebrews 5:7--"Who, in the days of his flesh, when he had
   offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears,
   unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he
   feared." We have in this description of our Lord's praying the outgoing
   of great spiritual forces. He prayed with "prayers and supplications."
   It was no formal, tentative effort. He was intense, personal and real.
   He was a pleader for God's good. He was in great need and He must cry
   with "strong cryings," made stronger still by His tears. In an agony
   the Son of God wrestled. His praying was no playing a mere part. His
   soul was engaged, and all His powers were taxed to a strain. Let us
   pause and look at Him and learn how to pray in earnest. Let us learn
   how to win in an agony of prayer that which seems to be withholden from
   us. A beautiful word is that, "feared," which occurs only twice in the
   New Testament, the fear of God.

   Jesus Christ was always a busy man with His work, but never too busy to
   pray. The divinest of business filled His heart and filled His hands,
   consumed His time, exhausted His nerves. But with Him even God's work
   must not crowd out God's praying. Saving people from sin or suffering
   must not, even with Christ, be substituted for praying, nor abate in
   the least the time or the intensity of these holiest of seasons. He
   filled the day with working for God; He employed the night with praying
   to God. The day-working made the night-praying a necessity. The
   night-praying sanctified and made successful the day-working. Too busy
   to pray gives religion Christian burial, it is true, but kills it
   nevertheless.

   In many cases only the bare fact, yet important and suggestive fact, is
   stated that He prayed. In other cases the very words which came out of
   His heart and fell from His lips are recorded. The man of prayer by
   pre-eminence was Jesus Christ. The epochs of His life were created by
   prayer, and all the minor details outlines and inlines of His life were
   inspired, coloured and impregnated by prayer.

   The prayer words of Jesus were sacred words. By them God speaks to God,
   and by them God is revealed and prayer is illustrated and enforced.
   Here is prayer in its purest form and in its mightiest potencies. It
   would seem that earth and heaven would uncover head and open ears most
   wide to catch the words of His praying who was truest God and truest
   man, and divinest of suppliants, who prayed as never man prayed. His
   prayers are our inspiration and pattern to pray.
     __________________________________________________________________

VIII. PRAYER INCIDENTS IN THE LIFE OF OUR LORD

   There was a great cape at the south of Africa and so many storms and so
   much loss of life until it was called the Cape of Death. One day in
   1789a bold navigator shoved the prow of his vessel into the storms that
   thundered around it and found a calm sea. He then named it the Cape of
   Good Hope. So there is a cape that jutted out from earth into the sea
   of eternity called death. All were afraid of it. All navigators, sooner
   or later, must contend with these murky waters. But once upon a time,
   nearly two thousand years ago, a brave navigator from heaven came and
   drove the prow of His frail humanity bark down into the gloomy waters
   of this cape and lay under its awful power for three days. Emerging
   therefrom, He found it to be the door to endless calm and joy, and now
   we call it Good Hope.--John W. Baker

   One of Christ's most impassioned and sublime paeans of prayer and
   praise is found recorded by both Matthew and Luke, with small verbal
   contrasts and with some diversity of detail and environments. He is
   reviewing the poor results of His ministry and remarking upon the
   feeble responses of man to God's vast outlay of love and mercy. He is
   arraigning the ingratitude of men to God, and is showing the fearfully
   destructive results of their indifference with their increased
   opportunities, favours and responsibilities.

   In the midst of these arraignments, denunciations and woes, the seventy
   disciples return to report the results of their mission. They were full
   of exhilaration at their success, and evinced it with no little
   self-gratulation. The spirit of Jesus was diverted, relieved and
   refreshed by their animation, catching somewhat the contagion of their
   joy, and sharing in their triumph. He rejoiced, gave thanks, and prayed
   a prayer wonderful for its brevity, its inspiration and its revelation:

   "In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O
   Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from
   the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so,
   Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight.

   "All things are delivered to me of my Father; and no man knoweth who
   the Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and he
   to whom the Son will reveal him," (Luke 10:21-22).

   The Christ life was in the image of His Father. He was the "express
   image of His person." And so the spirit of prayer with Christ was to do
   God's will. His constant asseveration was that He "came to do His
   Father's will," and not His own will. When the fearful crisis came in
   His life in Gethsemane, and all its darkness, direness and dread, with
   the crushing weight of man's sins and sorrows which were pressing down
   upon Him, His spirit and frame crushed, and almost expiring, then He
   cried out for relief, yet it was not His will which was to be followed.
   It was only an appeal out of weakness and death for God's relief in
   God's way. God's will was to be the law and the rule of His relief, if
   relief came.

   So he who follows Christ in prayer must have God's will as his law, his
   rule and his inspiration. In all praying, it is the man who prays. The
   life and the character flow into the closet. There is a mutual action
   and reaction. The closet has much to do with making the character,
   while the character has much to do with making the closet. It is "the
   effectual fervent prayer of the righteous man which availeth much." It
   is with them who "call upon the Lord out of a pure heart" we are to
   consort. Christ was the greatest of prayers because He was the holiest
   of men. His character is the praying character. His spirit is the life
   and power of prayer. He is not the best prayer who has the greatest
   fluency, the most brilliant imagination, the richest gifts, and the
   most fiery ardour, but he who has imbibed most of the spirit of Christ.

   It is he whose character is the nearest to a facsimile of Christ. His
   prayer referred to just named, in the form of thanksgiving, sets forth
   the characters upon whom God's power is bestowed and to whom God's
   person and will are revealed. "Hid these things from the wise and
   prudent," those, for instance, who are wise in their own eyes, skilled
   in letters, cultured, learned, philosophers, scribes, doctors,
   rabbis--"prudent"--one who can put things together, having insight,
   comprehension, expression. God's revelation of Himself and His will
   cannot be sought out and understood by reason, intelligence nor great
   learning. Great men and great minds are neither the channels nor
   depositories of God's revelation by virtue of their culture, braininess
   nor wisdom. God's system in redemption and providence is not to be
   thought out, open only to the learned and wise. The learned and the
   wise, following their learning and their wisdom, have always sadly and
   darkly missed God's thoughts and God's ways.

   The condition of receiving God's revelation and of holding God's truth
   is one of the heart, not one of the head. The ability to receive and
   search out is like that of the child, the babe, the synonym of
   docility, innocence and simplicity. These are the conditions on which
   God reveals Himself to men. The world by wisdom cannot know God. The
   world by wisdom can never receive nor understand God, because God
   reveals Himself to men's hearts, not to their heads. Only hearts can
   ever know God, can feel God, can see God, and can read God in His Book
   of Books. God is not grasped by thought but by feeling. The world gets
   God by revelation, not by philosophy. It is not apprehension, the
   mental ability to grasp God, but plasticity, ability to be impressed,
   that men need. It is not by hard, strong, stern, great reasoning that
   the world gets God or gets hold of God, but by big, soft, pure hearts.
   Not so much do men need light to see God as they need hearts to feel
   God.

   Human wisdom, great natural talents, and the culture of the schools,
   howsoever good they may be, can neither be the repositories nor
   conservors of God's revealed truth. The tree of knowledge has been the
   bane of faith, ever essaying to reduce revelation to a philosophy and
   to measure God by man. In its pride, it puts God out and puts men into
   God's truth. To become babes again, on our mother's bosom, quieted,
   weaned, without clamour or protest, is the only position in which to
   know God. A calmness on the surface, and in the depths of the soul, in
   which God can mirror His will, His Word and Himself--this is the
   attitude toward Him through which He can reveal Himself, and this
   attitude is the right attitude of prayer.

   Our Lord taught us the lesson of prayer by putting into practice in His
   life what He taught by His lips. Here is a simple but important
   statement, full of meaning; "And when he had sent the multitudes away,
   he went up into a mountain apart topray: and when the evening was come
   He was there alone." (Matt 14:23).

   The multitudes had been fed and were dismissed by our Lord.

   The Divine work of healing and teaching must be stayed awhile in order
   that time, place and opportunity for prayer might be secured,--Prayer,
   the divinest of all labour, the most important of all ministries. Away
   from the eager, anxious, seeking multitudes, He has gone while the day
   is yet bright, to be alone with God. The multitudes tax and exhaust
   Him, The disciples are tossed on the sea, but calmness reigns on the
   mountain top where our Lord is kneeling in secret prayer--where prayer
   rules. "When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take
   him by force, to make him a king, he departed again into a mountain
   alone."

   He must be alone in that moment with God. Temptation was in that hour.
   The multitude had feasted on the five loaves and the two fishes. Filled
   with food and excited beyond measure, they would fain make Him king. He
   flees from the temptation to secret prayer, for here is the source of
   His strength to resist evil. What a refuge was secret prayer even to
   Him! What a refuge to us from the world's dazzling and delusive crowns!
   What safety there is to be alone with God when the world tempts us,
   allures us, attracts us!

   The prayers of our Lord were prophetic and illustrative of the great
   truth that the greatest measure of the Holy Spirit, the attesting voice
   and opening Heavens are only secured by prayer. This is suggested by
   His baptism by John the Baptist, when He prayed as He was baptised, and
   immediately the Holy Spirit descended upon Him like a dove. More than
   prophetic and illustrative is this hour to Him. This critical hour is
   real and personal, consecrating and qualifying Him for God's highest
   purposes. Prayer to Him, just as it is to us, was a necessity, an
   absolute, invariable condition of securing God's fullest, consecrating
   and qualifying power. The Holy Spirit came upon Him in fullness of
   measure and power in the very act of prayer.

   And so the Holy Spirit comes upon us in fullness of measure and power
   only in answer to ardent and intense praying. The heavens were opened
   to Christ, and access and communion established and enlarged by prayer.
   Freedom and fullness of access and closeness of communion are secured
   to us as the heritage of prayer. The voice attesting His Sonship came
   to Christ in prayer. The witness of our sonship, clear and indubitable,
   is secured only by praying. The constant witness of our sonship can
   only be retained by those who pray without ceasing. When the stream of
   prayer is shallow and arrested, the evidence of our sonship becomes
   faint and inaudible.
     __________________________________________________________________

IX. PRAYER INCIDENTS IN THE LIFE OF OUR LORD (Continued)

   Sin is so unspeakably awful in its evil that it struck down, as to
   death and hell, the very Son of God Himself. He had been amazed enough
   at sin before. He had seen sin making angels of heaven into devils of
   hell. Death and all its terrors did not much move or disconcert our
   Lord. No. It was not death: It was sin. It was hell-fire in His soul.
   It was the coals, and the oil, and the rosin, and the juniper, and the
   turpentine of the fire that is not quenched.--Alexander Whyte, D.D.

   We note that from the revelation and inspiration of a transporting
   prayer-hour of Christ, as its natural sequence, there sounds out that
   gracious encouraging proclamation for heavy-hearted, restless, weary
   souls of earth, which has so impressed, arrested and drawn humanity as
   it has fallen on the ears of heavy-laden souls, which has so sweetened
   and relieved men of their toils and burdens:

   "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
   you rest.

   "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in
   heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

   "For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11:28-30).

   At the grave of Lazarus and as preparatory to and as a condition of
   calling him back to life, we have our Lord calling upon His Father in
   Heaven. "Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me, and I know that
   thou hearest me always." The lifting to Heaven of Christ's eyes--how
   much was there in it! How much of confidence and plea was in that look
   to Heaven! His very look, the lifting up of His eyes, carried His whole
   being Heavenward, and caused a pause in that world, and drew attention
   and help. All Heaven was engaged, pledged and moved when the Son of God
   looked up at this grave. O for a people with the Christly eye, Heaven
   lifted and Heaven arresting! As it was with Christ, so ought we to be
   so perfected in faith, so skilled in praying, that we could lift our
   eyes to Heaven and say with Him, with deepest humility, and with
   commanding confidence, "Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me."

   Once more we have a very touching and beautiful and instructive
   incident in Christ's praying, this time having to do with infants in
   their mothers' arms, parabolic as well as historical:

   "Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put
   his hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them.

   "But when Jesus saw it he was much displeased, and said unto them,
   Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of
   such is the kingdom of God.

   "Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God
   as a little child, he shall not enter therein.

   "And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them and blessed
   them." (Mark 10:13-16).

   This was one of the few times when stupid ignorance and unspiritual
   views aroused His indignation and displeasure. Vital principles were
   involved. The foundations were being destroyed, and worldly views
   actuated the disciples. Their temper and their words in rebuking those
   who brought their infants to Christ were exceedingly wrong. The very
   principles which He came to illustrate and propagate were being
   violated. Christ received the little ones. The big ones must become
   little ones. The old ones must become young ones ere Christ will
   receive them. Prayer helps the little ones. The cradle must be invested
   with prayer. We are to pray for our little ones. The children are now
   to be brought to Jesus Christ by prayer, as He is in Heaven and not on
   earth. They are to be brought to Him early for His blessing, even when
   they are infants. His blessing descends upon these little ones in
   answer to the prayers of those who bring them. With untiring
   importunity are they to be brought to Christ in earnest, persevering
   prayer by their fathers and mothers. Before they know, themselves,
   anything about coming of their own accord, parents are to present them
   to God in prayer, seeking His blessing upon their offspring and at the
   same time asking for wisdom, for grace and Divine help to rear them
   that they may come to Christ when they arrive at the years of
   accountability of their own accord.

   Holy hands and holy praying have much to do with guarding and training
   young lives and to form young characters for righteousness and Heaven.
   What benignity, simplicity, kindness, unworldliness and condescension
   and meekness, linked with prayerfulness, are in this act of this Divine
   Teacher!

   It was as Jesus was praying that Peter made that wonderful confession
   of his faith that Jesus was the Son of God:

   "And it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples were with
   him; and he asked them, saying, Whom say the people that I am? (Luke 9:18)

   "And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist; some, Elias;
   and others, Jeremias or one of the prophets.

   "He saith unto them, But whom say ye that l am?

   "And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the
   living God.

   "And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon
   Bar-Jona; for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my
   Father which is in heaven.

   "And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I
   will build my church: and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
   it.

   "And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven; and
   whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and
   whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Matt 16:14-19)

   It was after our Lord had made large promises to His disciples that He
   had appointed unto each of them a kingdom, and that they should sit at
   His table in His kingdom and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes
   of Israel, that He gave those words of warning to Simon Peter, telling
   him that He had prayed for Peter. "And the Lord said, Simon, Simon,
   behold Satan hath desired to have you, so that he may sift you as
   wheat. But I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. And when
   thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren." (Luke 22:31-32)

   Happy Peter, to have such an one as the Son of God to pray for him!
   Unhappy Peter, to be so in the toils of Satan as to demand so much of
   Christ's solicitude! How intense are the demands upon our prayers for
   some specific cases! Prayer must be personal in order to be to the
   fullest extent beneficial. Peter drew on Christ's praying more than any
   other disciple because of his exposure to greater perils, Pray for the
   most impulsive, the most imperilled ones by name. Our love and their
   danger give frequency, inspiration, intensity and personality to
   praying.

   We have seen how Christ had to flee from the multitude after the
   magnificent miracle of feeding the five thousand as they sought to make
   Him king. Then prayer was His escape and His refuge from this strong
   worldly temptation. He returns from that night of prayer with strength
   and calmness, and with a power to perform that other remarkable miracle
   of great wonder of walking on the sea.

   Even the loaves and fishes were sanctified by prayer before He served
   them to the multitude. "He looked up to Heaven and gave thanks." Prayer
   should sanctify our daily bread and multiply our seed sown.

   He looked up to heaven and heaved a sigh when He touched the tongue of
   the deaf man who had an impediment in his speech. Much akin was this
   sigh to that groaning in spirit which He evinced at the grave of
   Lazarus. "Jesus therefore again groaning in himself, cometh to the
   grave." Here was the sigh and groan of the Son of God over a human
   wreck, groaning that sin and hell had such a mastery over man; troubled
   that such a desolation and ruin were man's sad inheritance. This is a
   lesson to be ever learned by us. Here is a fact ever to be kept in mind
   and heart and which must ever, in some measure, weigh upon the inner
   spirits of God's children. We who have received the first fruit of the
   Spirit groan within ourselves at sin's waste, and death, and are filled
   with longings for the coming of a better day.

   Present in all great praying, making and marking it, is the man. It is
   impossible to separate the praying from the man. The constituent
   elements of the man are the constituents of his praying. The man flows
   through his praying. Only the fiery Elijah could do Elijah's fiery
   praying. We can get holy praying only from a holy man. Holy being can
   never exist without holy doing. Being is first, doing comes afterward.
   What we are gives being, force and inspiration to what we do.
   Character, that which is graven deep, ineradicably, imperishably within
   us, colours all we do.

   The praying of Christ, then, is not to be separated from the character
   of Christ. If He prayed more unweariedly, more self-denyingly, more
   holily, more simply and directly than other men, it was because these
   elements entered more largely into His character than into that of
   others.

   The transfiguration marks another epoch in His life, and that was
   pre-eminently a prayer epoch. Luke gives an account with the animus and
   aim of the event:

   "And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he took
   Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to pray.

   "And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his
   raiment was white and glistering.

   "And, behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and
   Elias:

   "Who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he should
   accomplish at Jerusalem." (Luke 9:28-31).

   The selection was made of three of His disciples for an inner circle of
   associates, in prayer. Few there be who have the spiritual tastes or
   aptitude for this inner circle. Even these three favoured ones could
   scarcely stand the strain of that long night of praying. We know that
   He went up on that mountain to pray, not to be transfigured. But it was
   as He prayed, the fashion of His countenance was altered and His
   raiment became white and glistering. There is nothing like prayer to
   change character and whiten conduct. There is nothing like prayer to
   bring heavenly visitants and to gild with heavenly glory earth's
   mountain to us, dull and drear. Peter calls it the holy mount, made so
   by prayer.

   Three times did the voice of God bear witness to the presence and
   person of His Son, Jesus Christ--at His baptism by John the Baptist,
   and then at His transfiguration the approving, consoling and witnessing
   voice of His Father was heard. He was found in prayer both of these
   times. The third time the attesting voice came, it was not on the
   heights of His transfigured glory, nor was it as He was girding Himself
   to begin His conflict and to enter upon His ministry, but it was when
   He was hastening to the awful end. He was entering the dark mystery of
   His last agony, and looking forward to it. The shadows were deepening,
   a dire calamity was approaching and an unknown and untried dread was
   before Him. Ruminating on His approaching death, prophesying about it,
   and forecasting the glory which would follow, in the midst of His high
   and mysterious discourse, the shadows come like a dread eclipse and He
   bursts out in an agony of prayer:

   "Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from
   this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour.

   "Father, glorify thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying,
   I have both glorified it and will glorify it again.

   "The people therefore that stood by, and heard it, said that it
   thundered: others said, An angel spoke to him.

   "Jesus answered and said, This voice came not because of me, but for
   your sakes." (John 12:27-30)

   But let it be noted that Christ is meeting and illuminating this
   fateful and distressing hour with prayer. How even thus early the flesh
   reluctantly shrank from the contemplated end!

   How fully does His prayer on the cross for His enemies synchronise with
   all He taught about love to our enemies, and with mercy and forgiveness
   to those who have trespassed against us! "Then said Jesus, Father,
   forgive them; for they know not what they do," Apologising for His
   murderers and praying for them, while they were jeering and mocking Him
   at His death pains and their hands were reeking with His blood! What
   amazing generosity, pity and love!

   Again, take another one of the prayers on the cross. How touching the
   prayer and how bitter the cup! How dark and desolate the hour as He
   exclaims, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" This is the last
   stroke that rends in twain His heart, more exquisite in its bitterness
   and its anguish and more heart-piercing than the kiss of Judas. All
   else was looked for, all else was put in His book of sorrows. But to
   have His Father's face withdrawn, God-forsaken, the hour when these
   distressing words escaped the lips of the dying Son of God! And yet how
   truthful He is! How childlike we find Him! And so when the end really
   comes, we hear Him again speaking to His Father: "Father, into thy
   hands I commit my spirit. And having said this, he gave up the ghost."
     __________________________________________________________________

X. OUR LORD'S MODEL PRAYER

   What satisfaction must it be to learn from God Himself with what words
   and in what manner, He would have us pray to Him so as not to pray in
   vain! We do not sufficiently consider the value of this prayer; the
   respect and attention which it requires; the preference to be given to
   it; its fulness and perfection; the frequent use we should make of it;
   and the spirit which we should bring with it. "Lord, teach us how to
   pray."--Adam Clark

   Jesus gives us the pattern prayer in what is commonly known as "The
   Lord's Prayer." In this model, perfect prayer He gives us a law form to
   be followed, and yet one to be filled in and enlarged as we may decide
   when we pray. The outlines and form are complete, yet it is but an
   outline, with many a blank, which our needs and convictions are to fill
   in.

   Christ puts words on our lips, words which are to be uttered by holy
   lives. Words belong to the life of prayer. Wordless prayers are like
   human spirits; pure and high they may be, but too ethereal and
   impalpable for earthly conflicts and earthly needs and uses. We must
   have spirits clothed in flesh and blood, and our prayers must be
   likewise clothed in words to give them point and power, a local
   habitation, and a name.

   This lesson of "The Lord's Prayer," drawn forth by the request of the
   disciples, "Lord, teach us to pray," has something in form and verbiage
   like the prayer sections of the Sermon on the Mount. It is the same
   great lesson of praying to "Our Father which art in Heaven," and is one
   of insistent importunity. No prayer lesson would be complete without
   it. It belongs to the first and last lessons in prayer. God's
   Fatherhood gives shape, value and confidence to all our praying.

   He teaches us that to hallow God's name is the first and the greatest
   of prayers. A desire for the glorious coming and the glorious
   establishment of God's glorious kingdom follows in value and in
   sequence the hallowing of God's name. He who really hallows God's name
   will hail the coming of the Kingdom of God, and will labour and pray to
   bring that kingdom to pass and to establish it. Christ's pupils in the
   school of prayer are to be taught diligently to hallow God's name, to
   work for God's kingdom, and to do God's will perfectly, completely and
   gladly, as it is done in Heaven.

   Prayer engages the highest interest and secures the highest glory of
   God. God's name, God's kingdom and God's will are all in it. Without
   prayer His name is profaned, His kingdom fails, and His will is decried
   and opposed. God's will can be done on earth as it is done in Heaven.
   God's will done on earth makes earth like Heaven. Importunate praying
   is the mighty energy which establishes God's will on earth as it is
   established in Heaven.

   He is still teaching us that prayer sanctifies and makes hopeful and
   sweet our daily toil for daily bread. Forgiveness of sins is to be
   sought by prayer, and the great prayer plea we are to make for
   forgiveness is that we have forgiven all those who have sinned against
   us. It involves love for our enemies so far as to pray for them, to
   bless them and not curse them, and to pardon their offences against us
   whatever those offences may be.

   We are to pray, "Lead us not into temptation," that is, that while we
   thus pray, the tempter and the temptation are to be watched against,
   resisted and prayed against.

   All these things He had laid down in this law of prayer, but many a
   simple lesson of comment, expansion, and expression He adds to His
   statute law.

   In this prayer He teaches His disciples, so familiar to thousands in
   this day who learned it at their mother's knees in childhood, the words
   are so childlike that children find their instruction, edification and
   comfort in them as they kneel and pray. The most glowing mystic and the
   most careful thinker finds each his own language in these simple words
   of prayer. Beautiful and revered as these words are, they are our words
   for solace, help and learning.

   He led the way in prayer that we might follow His footsteps. Matchless
   leader in matchless praying! Lord, teach us to pray as Thou didst
   Thyself pray!

   How marked the contrast between the Sacerdotal Prayer and this "Lord's
   Prayer," this copy for praying He gave to His disciples as the first
   elements of prayer. How simple and childlike! No one has ever
   approached in composition a prayer so simple in its petitions and yet
   so comprehensive in all of its requests.

   How these simple elements of prayer as given by our Lord commend
   themselves to us! This prayer is for us as well as for those to whom it
   was first given. It is for the child in the A B C of prayer, and it is
   for the graduate of the highest institutions of learning. It is a
   personal prayer, reaching to all our needs and covering all our sins.
   It is the highest form of prayer for others. As the scholar can never
   in all his after studies or learning dispense with his A B C, and as
   the alphabet gives form, colour and expression to all after learning,
   impregnating all and grounding all, so the learner in Christ can never
   dispense with the Lord's Prayer. But he may make it form the basis of
   his higher praying, this intercession for others in the Sacerdotal
   Prayer.

   The Lord's Prayer is ours by our mother's knee and fits us in all the
   stages of a joyous Christian Life. The Sacerdotal Prayer is ours also
   in the stages and office of our royal priesthood as intercessors before
   God. Here we have oneness with God, deep spiritual unity, and
   unswerving loyalty to God, living and praying to glorify God.
     __________________________________________________________________

XI. OUR LORD'S SACERDOTAL PRAYER

   Jesus closes His life with inimitable calmness, confidence and
   sublimity. "I have glorified Thee; I have finished the work which Thou
   gavest me to do." The annals of earth have nothing comparable to it in
   real security and sublimity. May we come to our end thus, in supreme
   loyalty to Christ.--Edward Bounds

   We come now to consider our Lord's Sacerdotal Prayer, as found recorded
   in the seventeenth chapter of John's Gospel.

   Obedience to the Father and abiding in the Father, these belong to the
   Son, and these belong to us, as partners with Christ in His Divine work
   of intercession. How tenderly and with what pathos and how absorbingly
   He prays for His disciples! "I pray for them; I pray not for the
   world." What a pattern of prayerfulness for God's people! For God's
   people are God's cause, God's Church and God's Kingdom. Pray for God's
   people, for their unity, their sanctification, and their glorification.
   How the subject of their unity pressed upon Him! These walls of
   separation, these alienations, these riven circles of God's family, and
   these warring tribes of ecclesiastics--how He is torn and bleeds and
   suffers afresh at the sight of these divisions! Unity--that is the
   great burden of that remarkable Sacerdotal Prayer. "That they may be
   one, even as we are one." The spiritual oneness of God's people--that
   is the heritage of God's glory to them, transmitted by Christ to His
   Church.

   First of all, in this prayer, Jesus prays for Himself, not now the
   suppliant as in Gethsemane, not weakness, but strength now. There is
   not now the pressure of darkness and of hell, but passing for the time
   over the fearful interim, He asks that He may be glorified, and that
   His exalted glory may secure glory to His Father. His sublime loyalty
   and fidelity to God are declared, that fidelity to God which is of the
   very essence of interceding prayer. Our devoted lives pray. Our
   unswerving loyalty to God are eloquent pleas to Him and give access and
   confidence in our advocacy. This prayer is gemmed, but its walls are
   adamant. What profound and granite truths! What fathomless mysteries!
   What deep and rich experiences do such statements as these involve:

   "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true
   God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent.

   "And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in
   them.

   "And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it, that the
   love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them.

   "And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory
   which I had with thee before the world was." (John 17:3-5)

   Let us stop and ask, have we eternal life? Do we know God
   experimentally, consciously, and do we know Him really and personally?
   Do we know Jesus Christ as a person, and as a personal Saviour? Do we
   know Him by a heart acquaintance, and know Him well? This, this only,
   is eternal life. And is Jesus glorified in us? Let us continue this
   personal inquiry. Do our lives prove His divinity? And does Jesus shine
   brighter because of us? Are we opaque or transparent bodies, and do we
   darken or reflect His pure light? Once more let us ask: Do we seek
   God's glory? Do we seek glory where Christ sought it? "Glorify thou me
   with thy own self." Do we esteem the presence and the possession of God
   our most excellent glory and our supreme good?

   How closely does He bind Himself and His Father to His people! His
   heart centers upon them in this high hour of holy communion with His
   Father.

   "I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of
   the world; thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept
   thy word.

   "Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me are
   of thee.

   "For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me; and they
   have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee,
   and they have believed that thou didst send me.

   "I pray for them; I pray not for the world; but for them which thou
   hast given me; for they are thine.

   "And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in
   them." (John 17:6-10)

   He prays also for keeping for these disciples. Not only were they to be
   chosen, elected and possessed, but were to be kept by the Father's
   watchful eyes and by the Father's omnipotent hand. "And now I am no
   more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy
   Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that
   they may be one, as we are."

   He prays that they might be kept by the Holy Father, in all holiness by
   the power of His Name. He asks that His people may be kept from sin,
   from all sin, from sin in the concrete and sin in the abstract, from
   sin in all its shapes of evil, from all sin in this world. He prays
   that they might not only be fit and ready for Heaven, but ready and fit
   for earth, for its sweetest privileges, its sternest duties, its
   deepest sorrows, and its richest joys; ready for all of its trials,
   consolations and triumphs. "I pray not that thou shouldest take them
   out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil."

   He prays that they may be kept from the world's greatest evil, which is
   sin. He desires that they may be kept from the guilt, the power, the
   pollution and the punishment of sin. The Revised Version makes it read,
   "That thou shouldst keep them from the evil one." Kept from the devil,
   so that he might not touch them, nor find them, nor have a place in
   them; that they might be all owned, possessed, filled and guarded by
   God. "Kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation."

   He places us in the arms of His Father, on the boom of His Father, and
   in the heart of His Father. He calls God into service, puts Him to the
   front, and places us under His Father's closer keeping, under His
   Father's shadow, and under the covert of His Father's wing. The
   Father's rod and staff are for our security, for our comfort, for our
   refuge, for our strength and guidance.

   These disciples were not to be taken out of the world, but kept from
   its evil, its monster evil, which is itself. "This present evil world."
   How the world seduces, dazzles, and deludes the children of men! His
   disciples are chosen out of the world, out of the world's bustle and
   earthliness, out of its all-devouring greed of gain, out of its
   money-desire, money-love, and money-toil. Earth draws and holds as if
   it was made out of gold and not out of dirt; as though it was covered
   with diamonds and not with graves.

   "They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world." Not only
   from sin and Satan were they to be kept, but also from the soil, stain
   and the taint of worldliness, as Christ was free from it Their relation
   to Christ was not only to free them from the world's defiling taint,
   its unhallowed love, and its criminal friendships, but the world's
   hatred would inevitably follow their Christ-likeness. No result so
   necessarily and universally follows its cause as this. "The world hath
   hated them because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the
   world."

   How solemn and almost awful the repetition of the declaration, "They
   are not of the world, even as I am not of the world." How pronounced,
   radical and eternal was our Lord Christ's divorce from the world! How
   pronounced, radical and eternal is that of our Lord's true followers
   from the world! The world hates the disciple as it hated his Lord, and
   will crucify the disciple just as it crucified his Lord. How pertinent
   the question, have we the Christ unworldliness? Does the world hate us
   as it hated our Lord? Are His words fulfilled in us?

   "If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you.

   "If ye were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye
   are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore
   the world hateth you." (John 15:18-19).

   He puts Himself before us clear cut as the full portraiture of an
   unworldly Christian. Here is our changeless pattern. "They are not of
   the world even as I am not of the world." We must be cut after this
   pattern.

   The subject of their unity pressed upon Him. Note how He called His
   Father's attention to it, and see how He pleaded for this unity of His
   followers: "And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the
   world and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name
   those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are."

   Again He returns to it as He sees the great crowds flocking to His
   standard as the ages pass on:

   "That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee,
   that they also may be one in us; that the world may believe that thou
   hast sent me.

   "And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be
   one, even as we are one.

   "I in them and thou in me that they may be made perfect in one; and
   that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as
   thou hast loved me."

   Notice how intently His heart was set on this unity. What shameful
   history, and what bloody annals has this lack of unity written for
   God's Church! These walls of separations, these alienations, these
   riven circles of God's family, these warring tribes of men, and these
   internecine fratricidal wars! He looks ahead and sees how Christ is
   torn, how He bleeds and suffers afresh in all these sad things of the
   future. The unity of God's people was to be the heritage of God's glory
   promised to them. Division and strife are the devil's bequest to the
   Church, a heritage of failure, weakness, shame and woe.

   The oneness of God's people was to be the one credential to the world
   of the divinity of Christ's mission on earth. Let us ask in all candor,
   are we praying for this unity as Christ prayed for it? Are we seeking
   the peace, the welfare, the glory, the might and the divinity of God's
   cause as it is found in the unity of God's people?

   Going back again, note, please, how He puts Himself as the exponent and
   the pattern of this unworldliness which He prays may possess His
   disciples. He sends them into the world just as His Father sent Him
   into the world. He expects them to be and do, just as He was and as He
   did for His Father. He sought the sanctification of His disciples that
   they might be wholly devoted to God and purified from all sin. He
   desired in them a holy life and a holy work for God. He devoted Himself
   to death in order that they might be devoted in life to God. For a true
   sanctification He prayed, a real, whole, and thorough sanctification,
   embracing soul, body and mind, for time and eternity. With Him the word
   itself had much to do with their true sanctification. "Sanctify them
   through thy truth; thy word is truth. And for their sakes I sanctify
   myself, that they also might be sanctified by the truth."

   Entire devotedness was to be the type of their sanctification. His
   prayer for their sanctification marks the pathway to full
   sanctification. Prayer is that pathway. All the ascending steps to that
   lofty position of entire sanctification are steps of prayer, increasing
   prayerfulness in spirit and increasing prayerfulness in fact. "Pray
   without ceasing" is the imperative prelude to "the very God of peace
   sanctify you wholly." And prayer is but the continued interlude and
   doxology of this rich grace in the heart: "I pray God your whole spirit
   and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
   Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it."

   We can only meet our full responsibilities and fulfill our high mission
   when we go forth sanctified as Christ our Lord was sanctified. He sends
   us into the world just as His Father sent Him into the world. He
   expects us to be as He was, to do as He did, and to glorify the Father
   just as He glorified the Father.

   What longings He had to have us with Him in Heaven: "Father, I will
   that they also whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that
   they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me." What response do
   our truant hearts make to this earnest, loving, Christly longing? Are
   we as eager for Heaven as He is to have us there? How calm, how
   majestic and how authoritative is His "I will"!

   He closes His life with inimitable calmness, confidence and sublimity.
   "I have glorified thee on the earth; I have finished the work which
   thou gavest me to do."

   The annals of earth have nothing comparable to it in real serenity and
   sublimity. May we come to our end thus in supreme loyalty to Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

XII. THE GETHSEMANE PRAYER

   The cup! the cup! the cup! Our Lord did not use many words: but He used
   His few words again and again, till this cup! and Thy will!--Thy will
   be done, and this cup--was all His prayer. "The cup! The cup! The cup!"
   cried Christ: first on His feet: and then on His knees: and then on His
   face. . . . "Lord, teach us to pray!"--Alexander Whyte, D.D.

   We come to Gethsamane. What a contrast! The sacerdotal prayer had been
   one of intense feelings of universal grasp, and of world-wide and
   illimitable sympathy and solicitude for His church. Perfect calmness
   and perfect poise reigned. Majestic He was and simple and free from
   passion or disquiet. The Royal Intercessor and Advocate for others, His
   petitions are like princely edicts, judicial and authoritative. How
   changed now! In Gethsemane He seems to have entered another region, and
   becomes another man. His sacerdotal prayer, so exquisite in its
   tranquil flow, so unruffled in its strong, deep current, is like the
   sun, moving in meridian, unsullied glory, brightening, vitalising,
   ennobling and blessing everything. The Gethsemane prayer is that same
   sun declining in the west, plunged into an ocean of storm and cloud,
   storm-covered, storm-eclipsed with gloom, darkness and terror on every
   side.

   The prayer in Gethsemane is exceptional in every way. The
   super-incumbent load of the world's sin is upon Him. The lowest point
   of His depression has been reached. The bitterest cup of all, His
   bitter cup, is being pressed to His lips. The weakness of all His
   weaknesses, the sorrow of all His sorrows, the agony of all His agonies
   are nowupon Him. The flesh is giving out with its fainting and
   trembling pulsations, like the trickling of His heart's blood. His
   enemies have thus far triumphed. Hell is in a jubilee and bad men are
   joining in the hellish carnival.

   Gethsemane was Satan's hour, Satan's power, and Satan's darkness. It
   was the hour of massing all of Satan's forces for a final, last
   conflict Jesus had said, "The prince of this world cometh and findeth
   nothing in me." The conflict for earth's mastery is before Him. The
   spirit led and drove Him into the stern conflict and severe temptation
   of the wilderness. But His Comforter, His Leader and His inspiration
   through His matchless history, seems to have left Him now. "He began to
   be sorrowful and very heavy," and we hear Him under this great pressure
   exclaiming, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death." The
   depression, conflict and agony had gone to the very core of His spirit,
   and had sunk Him to the very verge of death. "Sore amazed" He was.

   Surprise and awe depress His soul. "Very heavy" was the hour of hell's
   midnight which fell upon His spirit. Very heavy was this hour when all
   the sins of all the world, of every man, of all men, fell upon His
   immaculate soul, with all their stain and all their guilt.

   He cannot abide the presence of His chosen friends. They cannot enter
   into the depths and demands of this fearful hour. His trusted and set
   watchers were asleep. His Father's face is hid. His Father's approving
   voice is silent. The Holy Spirit, who had been with Him in all the
   trying hours of His life, seems to have withdrawn from the scene. Alone
   He must drink the cup, alone He must tread the winepress of God's
   fierce wrath and of Satan's power and darkness, and of man's envy,
   cruelty and vindictiveness. The scene is well described by Luke:

   "And he came out and went, as he was wont, to the Mount of Olives: and
   his disciples also followed him.

   "And when he was at the place, he said unto them, Pray that ye enter
   not into temptation.

   "And he was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast, and kneeled down
   and prayed.

   "Saying, Father, if thou be willing remove this cup from me;
   nevertheless, not my will, but thine, be done.

   "And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him.

   "And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly; and his sweat was as
   it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.

   "And when he rose up from prayer, and was come to his disciples, he
   found them sleeping for sorrow.

   "And said unto them, Why sleep ye? Rise and pray, lest ye enter into
   temptation."

   The prayer agony of Gethsemane crowns Calvary with glory and while the
   prayers offered by Christ on the cross are the union of weakness and
   strength, of deepest agony and desolation, accompanied with sweetest
   calm, divinest submission and implicit confidence.

   Nowhere in prophet or priest, king or ruler, of synagogue or church,
   does the ministry of prayer assume such marvels of variety, power and
   fragrance as in the life of Jesus Christ. It is the aroma of God's
   sweetest spices, aflame with God's glory, and consumed by God's will.

   We find in this Gethsemane prayer that which we find nowhere else in
   the praying of Christ. "O, my Father, if it be possible, let this cup
   pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt." This is
   different from the whole tenor and trend of His praying and doing. How
   different from His. sacerdotal prayer! "Father, I will," is the law and
   life of that prayer. In His last directions for prayer, He makes our
   will the measure and condition of prayer. "If ye abide in me, and my
   words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done
   unto you," He said to the Syrophoenician woman, "Great is thy faith! Be
   it unto thee as thou wilt."

   But in Gethsemane His praying was against the declared will of God. The
   pressure was so heavy upon Him, the cup was so bitter, the burden was
   so strange and intolerable, that the flesh cried out for relief.
   Prostrate, sinking, sorrowful unto death, He sought to be relieved from
   that which seemed too heavy to bear. He prayed, however, not in revolt
   against God's will, but in submission to that will, and yet to change
   God's plan and to alter God's purposes He prayed. Pressed by the
   weakness of the flesh, and by the powers of hell in all their dire,
   hellish malignity and might, Jesus was on this one only occasion
   constrained to pray against the will of God. He did it, though, with
   great wariness and pious caution. He did it with declared and
   inviolable submission to God's will. But this was exceptional.

   Simple submission to God's will is not the highest attitude of the soul
   to God. Submission may be seeming, induced by conditions, nothing but
   all enforced surrender, not cheerful but grudging, only a temporary
   expedient, a fitful resolve. When the occasion or calamity which called
   it forth is removed, the will returns to its old ways and to its old
   self.

   Jesus Christ prayed always with this one exception in conformity with
   the will of God. He was one with God's plan, and one with God's will.
   To pray in conformity with God's will was the life and law of Christ.
   The same was law of His praying. Conformity, to live one with God, is a
   far higher and diviner life than to live simply in submission to God.
   To pray in conformity--together with God--is a far higher and diviner
   way to pray than mere submission. At its best state, submission is
   non-rebellion, an acquiescence, which is good, but not the highest. The
   most powerful form of praying is positive, aggressive, mightily
   outgoing and creative. It molds things, changes things and brings
   things to pass.

   Conformity means to "stand perfect and complete in all the will of
   God." It means to delight to do God's will, to run with eagerness and
   ardour to carry out His plans. Conformity to God's will involves
   submission, patient, loving, sweet submission. But submission in itself
   falls short of and does not include conformity. We may be submissive
   but not conformed. We may accept results against which we have warred,
   and even be resigned to them.

   Conformity means to be one with God, both in result and in processes.
   Submission may be one with God in the end. Conformity is one with God
   in the beginning, and the end. Jesus had conformity, absolute and
   perfect, to God's will, and by that He prayed. This was the single
   point where there was a drawing back from God's processes, extorted by
   insupportable pain, fear and weariness. His submission was abject,
   loyal and confiding, as His conformity had been constant and perfect.
   Conformity is the only true submission, the most loyal, the sweetest
   and the fullest.

   Gethsemane has its lessons of humble supplications as Jesus knelt alone
   in the garden. Of burdened prostration, as He fell on His face, of
   intense agony, of distressing dread, of hesitancy and shrinking back,
   of crying out for relief--yet amid it all of cordial submission to God,
   accompanied with a singleness of purpose for His glory.

   Satan will have for each of us his hour and power of darkness and for
   each of us the bitter cup and the fearful spirit of gloom.

   We can pray against God's will, as Moses did, to enter the Promised
   Land; as Paul did about the thorn in the flesh; as David did for his
   doomed child; as Hezekiah did to live. We must pray against God's will
   three times when the stroke is the heaviest, the sorrow is the keenest,
   and the grief is the deepest. We may lie prostrate all night, as David
   did, through the hours of darkness. We may pray for hours, as Jesus
   did, and in the darkness of many nights, not measuring the hours by the
   clock, nor the nights by the calendar. It must all be, however, the
   prayer of submission.

   When sorrow and the night and desolation of Gethsemane fall in heaviest
   gloom on us, we ought to submit patiently and tearfully, if need be,
   but sweetly and resignedly, without tremour, or doubt, to the cup
   pressed by a Father's hand to our lips. "Not my will, but thine, be
   done," our broken hearts shall say. In God's own way, mysterious to us,
   that cup has in its bitterest dregs, as it had for the Son of God, the
   gem and gold of perfection. We are to be put into the crucible to be
   refined. Christ was made perfect in Gethsemane, not by the prayer, but
   by the suffering. "For it became him to make the captain of their
   salvation perfect through suffering." The cup could not pass because
   the suffering must go on and yield its fruit of perfection. Through
   many an hour of darkness and of hell's power, through many a sore
   conflict with the prince of this world, by drinking many a bitter cup,
   we are to be made perfect. To cry out against the terrific and
   searching flame of the crucible of a Father's painful processes is
   natural and is no sin, if there be perfect acquiescence in the answer
   to our prayer, perfect submission to God's will, and perfect devotion
   to His glory.

   If our hearts are true to God, we may plead with Him about His way, and
   seek relief from His painful processes. But the fierce fire of the
   crucible and the agonising victim with His agonising and submissive
   prayer, is not the normal and highest form of majestic and
   all-commanding prayer. We can cry out in the crucible, and can cry out
   against the flame which purifies and perfects us. God allows this,
   hears this, and answers this, not by taking us out of the crucible, nor
   by mitigating the fierceness of the flame, but by sending more than an
   angel to strengthen us. And yet crying out thus, with full submission,
   does not answer the real high, world-wide, royal and eternity-reaching
   behests of prayer.

   The prayer of submission must not be so used as to vitiate or
   substitute the higher and mightier prayer of faith. Nor must it be so
   stressed as to break down importunate and prevailing prayer, which
   would be to disarm prayer of its efficiency and discrown its glorious
   results and would be to encourage listless, sentimental and feeble
   praying.

   We are ever ready to excuse our lack of earnest and toilsome praying,
   by a fancied and delusive view of submission. We often end praying just
   where we ought to begin. We quit praying when God waits and is waiting
   for us to really pray. We are deterred by obstacles from praying, or we
   succumb to difficulties, and call it submission to God's will. A world
   of beggarly faith, of spiritual laziness, and of half-heartedness in
   prayer, are covered under the high and pious name of submission. To
   have no plan but to seek God's plan and carry it out, is of the essence
   and inspiration of Christly praying. This is far more than putting in a
   clause of submission. Jesus did this once in seeking to change the
   purpose of God, but all His other praying was the output of being
   perfectly at one with the plans and purposes of God. It is after this
   order we pray when we abide in Him and when His word abides in us. Then
   we ask what we will and it is done. It is then our prayers fashion and
   create things. Our wills then become God's will and His will becomes
   ours. The two become one, and there is not a note of discord.

   "And this is the confidence that we have in him, that, if we ask
   anything according to his will, he heareth us." And if we know that He
   hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we
   desired of Him. And then it proves true: "And whatsoever we ask, we
   receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things
   that are pleasing in his sight."

   What restraint, forbearance, self-denial, and loyalty to duty to God,
   and what deference to the Old Testament Scriptures are in that
   statement of our Lord: "Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my
   Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of
   angels? But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it
   must be?"
     __________________________________________________________________

XIII. THE HOLY SPIRIT AND PRAYER

   During the great Welsh Revival a minister was said to be very
   successful in winning souls by one sermon that he preached--hundreds
   were converted. Far away in a valley news reached a brother minister of
   the marvelous success of this sermon. He desired to find out the secret
   of the man's great success.--He walked the long way, and came to the
   minister's poor cottage, and the first thing he said was: "Brother,
   where did you get that sermon?" He was taken into a poorly furnished
   room and pointed to a spot where the carpet was worn threadbare, near a
   window that looked out upon the everlasting hills and solemn mountains
   and said, "Brother, there is where I got that sermon. My heart was
   heavy for men. One night I knelt there--and cried for power as I never
   preached before. The hours passed until midnight struck, and the stars
   looked down on a sleeping world, but the answer came not. I prayed on
   until I saw a faint streak of grey shoot up, then it war silver--silver
   became purple and gold. Then the sermon came and the power came and men
   fell under the influence of the Holy Spirit."--G. H. Morgan

   The Gospel without the Holy Spirit would be vain and nugatory. The gift
   of the Holy Spirit was vital to the work of Jesus Christ in the
   atonement. As Jesus did not begin His work on earth till He was
   anointed by the Holy Spirit, so the same Holy Spirit is necessary to
   carry forward and make effective the atoning work of the Son of God. As
   His anointing by the Holy Ghost at His baptism was an era in His life,
   so also is the coming of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost a great era in
   the work of redemption in making effective the work of Christ's Church.

   The Holy Spirit is not only the bright lamp of the Christian
   Dispensation, its Teacher and Guide, but is the Divine Helper.

   He is the enabling agent in God's new dispensation of doing. As the
   pilot takes his stand at the wheel to guide the vessel, so the Holy
   Ghost takes up His abode in the heart to guide and empower all its
   efforts. The Holy Ghost executes the whole gospel through the man by
   His presence and control of the spirit of the man.

   In the execution of the atoning work of Jesus Christ, in its general
   and more comprehensive operation, or in its minute and personal
   application, the Holy Spirit is the one efficient Agent, absolute and
   indispensable.

   The gospel cannot be executed but by the Holy Ghost. He only has the
   regal authority to do this royal work. Intellect cannot execute it,
   neither can learning, nor eloquence, nor truth, not even the revealed
   truth can execute the gospel. The marvelous facts of Christ's life told
   by hearts unanointed by the Holy Spirit will be dry and sterile, or
   "like a story told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying
   nothing." Not even the precious blood can execute the gospel. Not any,
   nor all of these, though spoken with angelic wisdom, angelic eloquence,
   can execute the gospel with saving power. Only tongues set on fire by
   the Holy Spirit can witness the saving power of Christ with power to
   save others.

   No one dared move from Jerusalem to proclaim or utter the message along
   its streets to the dying multitudes till the Holy Spirit came in
   baptismal power. John could not utter a word, though he had pillowed
   his head on Christ's bosom and caught the pulsations of Christ's heart,
   and though his brain was full of the wondrous facts of that life and of
   the wondrous words which fell from His lips. John must wait till a
   fuller and richer endowment than all of these came on him. Mary could
   not live over that Christ-life in the home of John, though she had
   nurtured the Christ and stored heart and mind full of holy and motherly
   memories, till she was empowered by the Holy Spirit.

   The coming of the Holy Spirit is dependent upon prayer, for prayer only
   can compass with its authority and demands, the realm where this Person
   of the Godhead has His abode. Even Christ was subject to this law of
   prayer. With Him, it is, it ever has been, and ever will be, "Ask, and
   it shall be given you; seek and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be
   opened unto you." To His disconsolate disciples, He said, "I will pray
   the Father, and He will give you another Comforter." This law of prayer
   for the Holy Spirit presses on the Master and on the disciples as well.
   Of so many of God's children it may truly be said, "Ye have Him not
   because ye ask not." And of many others it might be said, "Ye have Him
   in faint measure because ye pray for Him in faint measure."

   The Holy Spirit is the spirit of all grace and of each grace as well.
   Purity, power, holiness, faith, love, joy and all grace are brought
   into being and perfected by Him. Would we grow in grace in particular?
   Would we be perfect in all graces? We must seek the Holy Spirit by
   prayer.

   We urge the seeking of the Holy Spirit. We need Him, and we need to
   stir ourselves up to seek Him. The measure we receive of Him will be
   gauged by the fervour of faith and prayer with which we seek Him. Our
   ability to work for God, and to pray to God, and live for God, and
   affect others for God, will be dependent on the measure of the Holy
   Spirit received by us, dwelling in us, and working through us.

   Christ lays down the clear and explicit law of prayer in this regard
   for all of God's children. The world needs the Holy Spirit to convict
   it of sin and of righteousness and judgment to come and to make it feel
   its guiltiness in God's sight. And this spirit of conviction on sinners
   comes in answer to the prayers of God's people. God's children need Him
   more and more, need His life, His more abundant life, His
   super-abundant life. But that life begins and ever increases as the
   child of God prays for the Holy Spirit. "If ye, then, being evil, know
   how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
   Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?" This is the
   law, a condition brightened by a promise and sweetened by a
   relationship.

   The gift of the Holy Spirit is one of the benefits flowing to us from
   the glorious presence of Christ at the right hand of God, and this gift
   of the Holy Spirit, together with all the other gifts of the enthroned
   Christ, are secured to us by prayer, as the condition. The Bible by
   express statement, as well as by its general principles and clear and
   constant intimations, teaches us that the gift of the Holy Spirit is
   connected with and conditioned in prayer. That the Holy Spirit is in
   the world as God is in the world, is true. That the Holy Spirit is in
   the world as Christ is in the world is also true. And it is also true
   that there is nothing predicated of Him being in us and in the world
   that is not predicated of God and Christ being in us, and in the world.
   The Holy Spirit was in the world in measure before Pentecost, and in
   the measure of His operation then He was prayed for and sought for, and
   the principles are unchanged. The truth is, if we cannot pray for the
   Holy Spirit we cannot pray for any good thing from God, for He is the
   sum of all good to us. The truth is we seek after the Holy Spirit just
   as we seek after God, just as we seek after Christ, with strong cryings
   and tears, and we are to seek always for more and more of His gifts,
   and power, and grace. The truth is, that the presence and power of the
   Holy Spirit at any given meeting is conditioned on praying faith.

   Christ lays down the doctrine that the reception of the Holy Spirit is
   conditioned on prayer, and He Himself illustrated this universal law,
   for when the Holy Spirit came upon Him at His baptism, He was praying.
   The Apostolic Church in action illustrates the same great truth.

   A few days after Pentecost the disciples were in an agony of prayer,
   "and when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were
   assembled together; and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit."
   This incident destroys every theory which denies prayer as the
   condition of the coming and recoming of the Holy Spirit after
   Pentecost, and confirms the view that Pentecost as the result of a long
   struggle of prayer is illustrative and confirmatory that God's great
   and most precious gifts and conditioned on asking, seeking, knocking,
   prayer, ardent, importunate prayer.

   The same truth comes to the front very prominently in Philip's revival
   at Samaria. Though filled with joy by believing in Christ, and though
   received into the Church by water baptism, they did not receive the
   Holy Spirit till Peter and John went down there and prayed with and for
   them.

   Paul's praying was God's proof to Ananias that Paul was in a state
   which conditioned him to receive the Holy Spirit.

   The Holy Spirit is not only our Teacher, our Inspirer and our Revealer,
   in prayer, but the power of our praying in measure and force is
   measured by the Spirit's power working in us, as the will and work of
   God, according to God's good pleasure. In Ephes. 3, after the marvelous
   prayer of Paul for the Church, he seemed to be apprehensive that they
   would think he had gone beyond the ability of God in his large asking.
   And so he closes his appeal for them with the words, that God was able
   to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think. The power of
   God to do for us was measured by the power of God in us. "According
   to," says the Apostle, that is, after the measure of, "the power that
   worketh in us." The projecting power of praying outwardly was the
   projecting power of God in us. The feeble operation of God in us brings
   feeble praying. The mightiest operation of God in us brings the
   mightiest praying. The secret of prayerlessness is the absence of the
   work of the Holy Spirit in us. The secret of feeble praying everywhere
   is the lack of God's Spirit in His mightiness.

   The ability of God to answer and work through our prayers is measured
   by the Divine energy that God has been enabled to put in us by the Holy
   Spirit. The projecting power of praying is the measure of the Holy
   Spirit in us. So the statement of James in the fifth chapter of his
   Epistle is to this effect:

   "The fervent effectual prayer of a righteous man availeth much." The
   prayer inwrought in the heart by the almighty energy of the Holy Spirit
   works mightily in its results just as Elijah's prayer did.

   Would we pray efficiently and mightily? Then the Holy Spirit must work
   in us efficiently and mightily. Paul makes the principle of universal
   application. "Whereunto I also labour, striving according to his
   working, which worketh in me mightily." All labour for Christ which
   does not spring from the Holy Spirit working in us, is nugatory and
   vain. Our prayers and activities are so feeble and resultless, because
   He has not worked in us and cannot work in us His glorious work. Would
   you pray with mighty results? Seek the mighty workings of the Holy
   Spirit in your own spirit.

   Here we have the initial lesson in prayer for the Holy Spirit which was
   to enlarge to its full fruitage in Pentecost. It is to be noted that in
   John 14:16, where Jesus engages to pray the Father to send another
   Comforter, who would dwell with His disciples and be in them, that this
   is not a prayer that the Holy Spirit might do His work in making us
   children of God by regeneration, but it was for that fuller grace and
   power and Person of the Holy Spirit which we can claim by virtue of our
   relation as children of God. His work in us to make us the children of
   God and His Person abiding with us and in us, as children of God, are
   entirely different stages of the same Spirit in His relation to us. In
   this latter work, His gifts and works are greater, and His presence,
   even Himself, is greater than His works or gifts. His work in us
   prepares us for Himself. His gifts are the dispensations of His
   presence. He puts and makes us members of the body of Christ by His
   work. He keeps us in that body by His Presence and Person. He enables
   us to discharge the functions as members of that body by His gifts.

   The whole lesson culminates in asking for the Holy Spirit as the great
   objective point of all praying. In the direction in the Sermon on the
   Mount, we have the very plain and definite promise, "If ye, being
   evil,[]know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more
   shall your Father in Heaven give good things to them that ask him?" In
   Luke we have "good things" substituted by "the Holy Spirit." All good
   is comprehended in the Holy Spirit and He is the sum and climax of all
   good things.

   How complex, confusing and involved is many a human direction about
   obtaining the gift of the Holy Spirit as the abiding Comforter, our
   Sanctifier and the one who empowers us! How simple and direct is our
   Lord's direction--ASK! This is plain and direct. Ask with urgency, ask
   without fainting. Ask, seek, knock, till He comes. Your Heavenly Father
   will surely send Him if you ask for Him. Wait in the Lord for the Holy
   Spirit. It is the child waiting, asking, urging and praying
   perseveringly for the Father's greatest gift and for the child's
   greatest need, the Holy Spirit.

   How are we to obtain the Holy Spirit so freely promised to those who
   seek Him believingly? Wait, press, and persevere with all the calmness
   and with all the ardour of a faith which knows no fear, which allows no
   doubt, a faith which staggers not at the promise through unbelief, a
   faith which in its darkest and most depressed hours against hope
   believes in hope, which is brightened by hope and strengthened by hope,
   and which is saved by hope.

   Wait and pray--here is the key which unlocks every castle of despair,
   and which opens' every treasure-store of God. It is the simplicity of
   the child's asking of the Father, who gives with a largeness,
   liberality, and cheerfulness, infinitely above everything ever known to
   earthly parents. Ask for the Holy Spirit--seek for the Holy
   Spirit--knock for the Holy Spirit. He is the Father's greatest gift for
   the child's greatest need.

   In these three words, "ask," "seek" and "knock," given us by Christ, we
   have the repetition of the advancing steps of insistency and effort. He
   is laying Himself out in command and promise in the strongest way,
   showing us that if we will lay ourselves out in prayer and will
   persevere, rising to higher and stronger attitudes and sinking to
   deeper depths of intensity and effort, that the answer must inevitibly
   come. So that it is true the stars would fail to shine before the
   asking, the seeking and the knocking would fail to obtain what is
   needed and desired.

   There is no elect company here, only the election of undismayed,
   importunate, never-fainting effort in prayer: "For to him that
   knocketh, it shall be opened." Nothing can be stronger than this
   declaration assuring us of the answer unless it be the promise upon
   which it is based, "And I say unto you, ask and it shall be given you."
     __________________________________________________________________

XIV. THE HOLY SPIRIT OUR HELPER IN PRAYER

   We must pray in the Spirit., in the Holy Ghost, if we would pray at
   all. Lay this, I beseech you, to heart. Do not address yourselves to
   prayer as to a work to be accomplished in your own natural strength. It
   is a work of God, of God the Holy Ghost, a work of His in you and by
   you, and in which you must be fellow-workers with Him--but His work
   notwithstanding.--Archbishop Trench

   One of the revelations of the New Testament concerning the Holy Spirit
   is that He is our helper in prayer. So we have in the following
   incident in our Lord's life the close connection between the Holy
   Spirit's work and prayer:

   "At that time Jesus rejoiced in spirit and said, I thank thee, O
   Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from
   the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes; even so,
   Father, for it seemed good in thy sight."--Luke 10:21.

   Here we have revelations of what God is to us. Only the child's heart
   can know the Father, and only the child's heart can reveal the Father.
   It is by prayer only that all things are delivered to us by the Father
   through the Son. It is only by prayer that all things are revealed to
   us by the Father and by the Son. It is only in prayer that the Father
   gives Himself to us, which is much more every way than all other things
   whatsoever.

   The Revised Version reads: "At that same hour Jesus rejoiced in the
   Holy Spirit." This sets forth that great truth not generally known, or
   if known, ignored, that Jesus Christ was generally led by the Holy
   Spirit, and that His joy and His praying, as well as His working, and
   His life, were under the inspiration, law and guidance of the Holy
   Spirit.

   Turn to and read this passage:

   Romans 8:26--"Likewise the spirit also helpeth our infirmities; for we
   know not what we should pray for as we ought."

   This text is most pregnant and vital, and needs to be quoted. Patience,
   hope and waiting help us in prayer. But the greatest and the divinest
   of all helpers is the Holy Spirit. He takes hold of things for us. We
   are dark and confused, ignorant and weak in many things, in fact in
   everything pertaining to the Heavenly life, especially in the simple
   service of prayer. There is an "ought" on us, an obligation, a
   necessity to pray, a spiritual necessity upon us of the most absolute
   and imperative kind. But we do not feel the obligation and have no
   ability to meet it. The Holy Spirit helps us in our weaknesses, gives
   wisdom to our ignorance, turns ignorance into wisdom, and changes our
   weakness into strength. The Spirit Himself does this. He helps and
   takes hold with us as we tug and toil. He adds His wisdom to our
   ignorance, gives His strength to our weakness. He pleads for us and in
   us. He quickens, illumines and inspires our prayers. He indites and
   elevates the matter of our prayers, and inspires the words and feelings
   of our prayers. He works mightily in us so that we can pray mightily.
   He enables us to pray always and ever according to the will of God.

   In 1 John 5:14 we have these words:

   "And this is the confidence that we have in him, that, if we ask
   anything according to his will, he heareth us:

   "And if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we
   have the petitions that we desired of him."

   That which gives us boldness and so much freedom and fullness of
   approach toward God, the fact and basis of that boldness and liberty of
   approach, is that we are asking "according to the will of God." This
   does not mean submission, but conformity. "According to" means after
   the standard, conformity, agreement We have boldness and all freedom of
   access to God because we are praying in conformity to His will. God
   records His general will in His Word, but He has this special work in
   praying for us to do. His "things are prepared for us," as the prophet
   says, who "wait upon him," How can we know the will of God in our
   praying? What are the things which God designs specially for us to do
   and pray? The Holy Spirit reveals them to us perpetually.

   "The Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which
   cannot be uttered.

   "And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the
   spirit because he maketh intercession for the saints according to the
   will of God." Combine this text with those words of Paul in 1 Cor. 2:8
   and what follows:

   "But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
   entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for
   them that love him.

   "But God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit; for the spirit
   searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.

   "For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which
   is in him? Even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the spirit of
   God.

   "Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit
   which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to
   us of God.

   "Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
   teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth, comparing spiritual things
   with spiritual.

   "But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; for
   they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they
   are spiritually discerned.

   "But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet he himself is judged
   of no man.

   "For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But
   we have the mind of Christ."

   "Revealed to us by the Spirit." Note those words. God searches the
   heart where the Spirit dwells and knows the mind of the Spirit. The
   Spirit who dwells in our hearts searches the deep purposes and the will
   of God to us, and reveals those purposes and that will of God, "that we
   might know the things which are freely given to us of God." Our spirits
   are so fully indwelt by the Spirit of God, so responsive and obedient
   to His illumination and to His will, that we ask with holy boldness and
   freedom the things which the Spirit of God has shown us as the will of
   God, and faith is assured. Then "we know that we have the petitions
   that we have asked."

   The natural man prays, but prays according to his own will, fancy and
   desire. If he has ardent desires and groanings, they are the fire and
   agony of nature simply, and not that of the Spirit. What a world of
   natural praying there is, which is selfish, self-contented,
   self-inspired! The Spirit, when He prays through us, or helps us to
   meet the mighty "oughtness" of right praying, trims our praying down to
   the will of God, and then we give heart and expression to His
   unutterable groanings. Then we have the mind of Christ, and pray as He
   would pray. His thoughts, purposes and desires are our desires,
   purposes and thoughts.

   This is not a new and different Bible from that which we already have,
   but it is the Bible we have, applied personally by the Spirit of God.
   It is not new texts, but rather the Spirit's embellishing of certain
   texts for us at the time.

   It is the unfolding of the word by the Spirit's light, guidance,
   teaching, enabling us to perform the great office of intercessors on
   earth, in harmony with the great intercessions of Jesus Christ at the
   Father's right hand in Heaven.

   We have in the Holy Spirit an illustration and an enabler of what this
   intercession is and ought to be. We are charged to supplicate in the
   Spirit and to pray in the Holy Spirit. We are reminded that the Holy
   Spirit "helpeth our infirmities," and that while intercession is an art
   of so Divine and so high a nature that though we know not what to pray
   for as we ought, yet the Spirit teaches us this Heavenly science, by
   making intercession in us "with groanings which cannot be uttered." How
   burdened these intercessions of the Holy Spirit! How profoundly He
   feels the world's sin, the world's woe, and the world's loss, and how
   deeply He sympathises with the dire conditions, are seen in His
   groanings which are too deep for utterance and too sacred to be voiced
   by Him. He inspires us to this most Divine work of intercession, and
   His strength enables us to sigh unto God for the oppressed, the
   burdened and the distressed creation. The Holy Spirit helps us in many
   ways.

   How intense will be the intercessions of the saints who supplicate in
   the spirit. How vain and delusive and how utterly fruitless and
   inefficient are prayers without the Spirit! Official prayers they may
   be, fitted for state occasions, beautiful and courtly, but worth less
   than nothing as God values prayer.

   It is our unfainting praying which will help the Holy Spirit to His
   mightiest work in us, and at the same time He helps us to these
   strenuous and exalted efforts in prayer.

   We can and do pray by many inspirations and in many ways which are not
   of God. Many prayers are stereotyped in manner and in matter, in part,
   if not as a whole. Many prayers are hearty and vehement, but it is
   natural heartiness and a fleshly vehemence. Much praying is done by
   dint of habit and through form. Habit is a second nature and holds to
   the good, when so directed, as well as to the bad. The habit of praying
   is a good habit, and should be early and strongly formed; but to pray
   by habit merely is to destroy the life of prayer and allow it to
   degenerate into a hollow and sham-producing form, Habit may form the
   bank for the river of prayer, but there must be a strong, deep, pure
   current, crystal and life-giving, flowing between these two banks.
   Hannah multiplied her praying, "but she poured out her soul before the
   Lord." We cannot make our prayer habits too marked and controlling if
   the life-waters be full and overflow the banks.

   Our divine example in praying is the Son of God. Our Divine Helper in
   praying is the Holy Spirit. He quickens us to pray and helps us in
   praying. Acceptable prayer must be begun and carried on by His presence
   and inspiration. We are enjoined in the Holy Scriptures to "pray in the
   Holy Ghost." We are charged to "pray always with all prayer and
   supplication in the Spirit." We are reminded for our encouragement,
   that "Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities; for we know not
   what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit itself maketh
   intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered." "And he
   that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit,
   because He maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of
   God."

   So ignorant are we in this matter of prayer; so impotent are all other
   teachers to impart its lessons to our understanding and heart, that the
   Holy Spirit comes as the infallible and all-wise teacher to instruct us
   in this divine art. "To pray with all your heart and all your strength,
   with the reason and the will, this is the greatest achievement of the
   Christian warfare on earth." This is what we are taught to do and
   enabled to do by the Holy Spirit. If no man can say that Jesus is the
   Christ but by the Spirit's help; for the much greater reason can no man
   pray save by the aid of God's Spirit. Our mother's lips, now sealed by
   death, taught us many sweet lessons of prayer; prayers which have bound
   and held our hearts like golden threads; but these prayers, flowing
   through the natural channel of a mother's love, can not serve the
   purposes of our manhood's warring, stormy life. These maternal lessons
   are but the A B C of praying. For the higher and graduating lessons in
   prayer we must have the Holy Spirit. He only can unfold to us the
   mysteries of the prayer-life, its duty and its service.

   To pray by the Holy Spirit we must have Him always. He does not, like
   earthly teachers, teach us the lesson and then withdraw. He stays to
   help us practise the lesson He has taught. We pray, not by the precepts
   and lessons He has taught, but we pray by Him. He is both teacher and
   lesson. We can only know the lesson because He is ever with us to
   inspire, to illumine, to explain, to help us to do. We pray not by the
   truth the Holy Spirit reveals to us, but we pray by the actual presence
   of the Holy Spirit. He puts the desire in our hearts; kindles that
   desire by His own flame. We simply give lip and voice and heart to His
   unutterable groanings. Our prayers are taken up by Him and energised
   and sanctified by His intercession. He prays for us, through us and in
   us. We pray by Him, through Him and in Him. He puts the prayer in us
   and we give it utterance and heart.

   We always pray according to the will of God when the Holy Spirit helps
   our praying. He prays through us only "according to the will of God."
   If our prayers are not according to the will of God they die in the
   presence of the Holy Spirit. He gives such prayers no countenance, no
   help. Discountenanced and unhelped by Him, prayers, not according to
   God's will, soon die out of every heart where the Holy Spirit dwells.

   We must, as Jude says, "Pray in the Holy Ghost." As Paul says, "with
   all prayer and supplication in the Spirit." Never forgetting that "the
   Spirit also helpeth our infirmities; for we know not what we should
   pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us
   with groanings which cannot be uttered." Above all, over all, and
   through all our praying there must be the Name of Christ, which
   includes the power of His blood, the energy of His intercession, the
   fullness of the enthroned Christ. "whatsoever ye ask in my name that
   will I do."
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

XV. Index of Scripture References

   Ezekiel

   [1]36

   Matthew

   [2]5:23   [3]18:19

   Mark

   [4]8:22

   John

   [5]5:13   [6]14:16

   Romans

   [7]8:26

   1 Corinthians

   [8]2:8

   Ephesians

   [9]3   [10]3   [11]6

   Philippians

   [12]4:6   [13]4:6

   1 Timothy

   [14]1:8   [15]2:1   [16]2:13

   Hebrews

   [17]5:7   [18]5:7

   James

   [19]1:5

   1 John

   [20]5:14

   Revelation

   [21]4:6   [22]8

</p>
</div>
</osisText>
</osis>