<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<osis xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.bibletechnologies.net/2003/OSIS/namespace http://www.bibletechnologies.net/osisCore.2.1.1.xsd"
	xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" xmlns="http://www.bibletechnologies.net/2003/OSIS/namespace">
	<osisText osisRefWork="book" xml:lang="en" osisIDWork="Holiness">
		<header>
			<work osisWork="Holiness">
				<title>Holiness: Its Nature, Hindrances, Difficulties, and Roots</title>
				<creator role="aut">John Charles Ryle</creator>
			</work>
			<work osisWork="Bible">
				<refSystem>Bible</refSystem>
			</work>
		</header>
		<div type="book" osisID="Holiness">
			<title>Holiness: Its Nature, Hindrances, Difficulties, and Roots</title>
			<title type="x-author">John Charles Ryle</title>
			<p>
HOLINESS
ITS NATURE, HINDRANCES,
DIFFICULTIES, AND ROOTS

    BY

J. C. RYLE, D.D.

   Foreword by D. MARTYN
   LLOYD-JONES

  JAMES CLARKE and CO., LIMITED

    6 WARDROBE PLACE, CARTER LANE, LONDON EC.4

   THIS EDITION 1952

   Printed in Great Britain
   at the Burleigh Press, Lewins Mead, Bristol.
     __________________________________________________________________

FOREWORD

   ONE of the most encouraging and hopeful signs I have observed for many
   a long day in evangelical circles has been a renewed and increasing
   interest in the writings of Bishop J. C. Ryle.

   In his day he was famous, outstanding and beloved as a champion and
   exponent of the evangelical and reformed faith. For some reason or
   other, however, his name and his works are not familiar to modern
   evangelicals. His books are, I believe, all out of print in this
   country and very difficult to obtain secondhand.

   The differing fates suffered in this respect by Bishop Ryle and his
   near contemporary, Bishop Moule, have always been to me a matter of
   great interest. But Bishop Ryle is being re-discovered, and there is a
   new call for the re-publication of his works.

   All who have ever read him will be grateful for this new edition of his
   great book on Holiness'. I shall never forget the
   satisfaction--spiritual and mental--with which I read it some twenty
   years ago after having stumbled across it in a second-hand book shop.

   It really needs no preface or word of introduction. All I will do is to
   urge all readers to read the Bishop's own Introduction. It is
   invaluable as it provides the setting in which he felt impelled to
   write the book.

   The characteristics of Bishop Ryle's method and style are obvious. He
   is pre-eminently and always scriptural and expository. He never starts
   with a theory into which he tries to fit various scriptures. He always
   starts with the Word and expounds it. It is exposition at its very best
   and highest. It is always clear and logical and invariably leads to a
   clear enunciation of doctrine. It is strong and virile and entirely
   free from the sentimentality that is often described as "devotional."

   The Bishop had drunk deeply from the wells of the great classical
   Puritan writers of the seventeenth century. Indeed, it would be but
   accurate to say that his books are a distillation of true Puritan
   theology presented in a highly readable and modern form.

   Ryle, like his great masters, has no easy way to holiness to offer us,
   and no "patent" method by which it can be attained; but he invariably
   produces that "hunger and thirst after righteousness" which is the only
   indispensable condition to being "filled."

   May this book be widely read, that God's name be increasingly honoured
   and glorified.

   D. M. Lloyd-Jones.

   Westminster Chapel.
     __________________________________________________________________

INTRODUCTION

   The twenty papers contained in this volume are a humble contribution to
   a cause which is exciting much interest in the present day,--I mean the
   cause of Scriptural holiness. It is a cause which everyone who loves
   Christ, and desires to advance His kingdom in the world, should
   endeavour to help forward. Everyone can do something, and I wish to add
   my mite.

   The reader will find little that is directly controversial in these
   papers. I have carefully abstained from naming modern teachers and
   modern books. I have been content to give the result of my own study of
   the Bible, my own private meditations, my own prayers for light, and my
   own reading of old divines. If in anything I am still in error, I hope
   I shall be shown it before I leave the world. We all see in part, and
   have a treasure in earthen vessels. I trust I am willing to learn.

   I have had a deep conviction for many years that practical holiness and
   entire self-consecration to God are not sufficiently attended to by
   modern Christians in this country. Politics, or controversy, or
   party-spirit, or worldliness, have eaten out the heart of lively piety
   in too many of us. The subject of personal godliness has fallen sadly
   into the background. The standard of living has become painfully low in
   many quarters. The immense importance of "adorning the doctrine of God
   our Saviour" (Titus ii. 10), and making it lovely and beautiful by our
   daily habits and tempers, has been far too much overlooked. Worldly
   people sometimes complain with reason that "religious" persons,
   so-called, are not so amiable and unselfish and good-natured as others
   who make no profession of religion. Yet sanctification, in its place
   and proportion, is quite as important as justification. Sound
   Protestant and Evangelical doctrine is useless if it is not accompanied
   by a holy life. It is worse than useless: it does positive harm. It is
   despised by keen-sighted and shrewd men of the world, as an unreal and
   hollow thing, and brings religion into contempt. It is my firm
   impression that we want a thorough revival about Scriptural holiness,
   and I am deeply thankful that attention is being directed to the point.

   It is, however, of great importance that the whole subject should be
   placed on right foundations, and that the movement about it should not
   be damaged by crude, disproportioned, and one-sided statements. If such
   statements abound, we must not be surprised. Satan knows well the power
   of true holiness, and the immense injury which increased attention to
   it will do to his kingdom. It is his interest, therefore, to promote
   strife and controversy about this part of God's truth. Just as in time
   past he has succeeded in mystifying and confusing men's minds about
   justification, so he is labouring in the present day to make men
   "darken counsel by words without knowledge" about sanctification. May
   the Lord rebuke him! I cannot however give up the hope that good will
   be brought out of evil, that discussion will elicit truth, and that
   variety of opinion will lead us all to search the Scriptures more, to
   pray more, and to become more diligent in trying to find out what is
   "the mind of the Spirit."

   I now feel it a duty, in sending forth this volume, to offer a few
   introductory hints to those whose attention is specially directed to
   the subject of sanctification in the present day. I know that I do so
   at the risk of seeming presumptuous, and possibly of giving offence.
   But something must be ventured in the interests of God's truth. I shall
   therefore put my hints into the form of questions, and I shall request
   my readers to take them as "Cautions for the Times on the subject of
   holiness."

   (1) I ask, in the first place, whether it is wise to speak of faith as
   the one thing needful, and the only thing required, as many seem to do
   now-a-days in handling the doctrine of sanctification?--Is it wise to
   proclaim in so bald, naked, and unqualified a way as many do, that the
   holiness of converted people is by faith only, and not at all by
   personal exertion? Is it according to the proportion of God's Word? I
   doubt it.

   That faith in Christ is the root of all holiness--that the first step
   towards a holy life is to believe on Christ--that until we believe we
   have not a jot of holiness--that union with Christ by faith is the
   secret of both beginning to be holy and continuing holy--that the life
   that we live in the flesh we must live by the faith of the Son of
   God--that faith purifies the heart--that faith is the victory which
   overcomes the world--that by faith the elders obtained a good
   report--all these are truths which no well-instructed Christian will
   ever think of denying. But surely the Scriptures teach us that in
   following holiness the true Christian needs personal exertion and work
   as well as faith. The very same Apostle who says in one place, "The
   life that I live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God,"
   says in another place, "I fight--I run--I keep under my body;" and in
   other places, "Let us cleanse ourselves--let us labour, let us lay
   aside every weight." (Gal. ii. 20;1 Cor. ix. 26; 2 Cor. vii. 1; Heb.
   iv. 11; xii. 1 .) Moreover, the Scriptures nowhere teach us that faith
   sanctifies us in the same sense, and in the same manner, that faith
   justifies us! Justifying faith is a grace that "worketh not," but
   simply trusts, rests, and leans on Christ. (Rom. iv. 5.) Sanctifying
   faith is a grace of which the very life is action: it "worketh by
   love," and, like a main-spring, moves the whole inward man. (Gal. v.
   6.) After all, the precise phrase "sanctified by faith" is only found
   once in the New Testament. The Lord Jesus said to Saul, "I send thee,
   that they may receive forgiveness of sins and inheritance among them
   which are sanctified by faith that is in Me." Yet even there I agree
   with Alford, that "by faith" belongs to the whole sentence, and must
   not be tied to the word "sanctified." The true sense is, "that by faith
   in Me they may receive forgiveness of sins and inheritance among them
   that are sanctified." (Compare Acts xxvi. 18 with Acts xx. 32.)

   As to the phrase "holiness by faith," I find it nowhere in the New
   Testament. Without controversy, in the matter of our justification
   before God, faith in Christ is the one thing needful. All that simply
   believe are justified. Righteousness is imputed "to him that worketh
   not but believeth." (Rom. iv. 5.) It is thoroughly Scriptural and right
   to say "faith alone justifies." But it is not equally Scriptural and
   right so say "faith alone sanctifies." The saying requires very large
   qualification. Let one fact suffice. We are frequently told that a man
   is "justified by faith without the deeds of the law," by St. Paul. But
   not once are we told that we are "sanctified by faith without the deeds
   of the law." On the contrary, we are expressly told by St. James that
   the faith whereby we are visibly and demonstratively justified before
   man, is a faith which "if it hath not works is dead, being alone." [1]
   (James ii. 17.) I may be told, in reply, that no one of course means to
   disparage "works" as an essential part of a holy life. It would be
   well, however, to make this more plain than many seem to make it in
   these days.

   (2) I ask, in the second place, whether it is wise to make so little as
   some appear to do, comparatively, of the many practical exhortations to
   holiness in daily life which are to be found in the Sermon on the
   Mount, and in the latter part of most of St. Paul's epistles? Is it
   according to the proportion of God's Word? I doubt it.

   That a life of daily self-consecration and daily communion with God
   should be aimed at by everyone who professes to be a believer--that we
   should strive to attain the habit of going to the Lord Jesus Christ
   with everything we find a burden, whether great or small, and casting
   it upon Him--all this, I repeat, no well-taught child of God will dream
   of disputing. But surely the New Testament teaches us that we want
   something more than generalities about holy living, which often prick
   no conscience and give no offence. The details and particular
   ingredients of which holiness is composed in daily life, ought to be
   fully set forth and pressed on believers by all who profess to handle
   the subject. True holiness does not consist merely of believing and
   feeling, but of doing and bearing, and a practical exhibition of active
   and passive grace. Our tongues, our tempers, our natural passions and
   inclinations--our conduct as parents and children, masters and
   servants, husbands and wives, rulers and subjects--our dress, our
   employment of time, our behaviour in business, our demeanour in
   sickness and health, in riches and in poverty--all, all these are
   matters which are fully treated by inspired writers. They are not
   content with a general statement of what we should believe and feel,
   and how we are to have the roots of holiness planted in our hearts.
   They dig down lower. They go into particulars. They specify minutely
   what a holy man ought to do and be in his own family, and by his own
   fireside, if he abides in Christ. I doubt whether this sort of teaching
   is sufficiently attended to in the movement of the present day. When
   people talk of having received "such a blessing," and of having found
   "the higher life," after hearing some earnest advocate of "holiness by
   faith and self-consecration," while their families and friends see no
   improvement and no increased sanctity in their daily tempers and
   behaviour, immense harm is done to the cause of Christ. True holiness,
   we surely ought to remember, does not consist merely of inward
   sensations and impressions. It is much more than tears, and sighs, and
   bodily excitement, and a quickened pulse, and a passionate feeling of
   attachment to our own favourite preachers and our own religious party,
   and a readiness to quarrel with everyone who does not agree with us. It
   is something of "the image of Christ," which can be seen and observed
   by others in our private life, and habits, and character, and doings.
   (Rom. viii. 29.)

   (3) I ask, in the third place, whether it is wise to use vague language
   about perfection, and to press on Christians a standard of holiness, as
   attainable in this world for which there is no warrant to be shown
   either in Scripture or experience? I doubt it.

   That believers are exhorted to "perfect holiness in the fear of
   God"--to "go on to perfection"--to "be perfect," no careful reader of
   his Bible will ever think of denying. (2 Cor. vii. 1 ; Heb. vi. 1 ; 2
   Cor. xiii. 11.) But I have yet to learn that there is a single passage
   in Scripture which teaches that a literal perfection, a complete and
   entire freedom from sin, in thought, or word, or deed, is attainable,
   or ever has been attained, by any child of Adam in this world. A
   comparative perfection, a perfection in knowledge, an all-round
   consistency in every relation of life, a thorough soundness in every
   point of doctrine--this may be seen occasionally in some of God's
   believing people. But as to an absolute literal perfection, the most
   eminent saints of God in every age have always been the very last to
   lay claim to it! On the contrary, they have always had the deepest
   sense of their own utter unworthiness and imperfection. The more
   spiritual light they have enjoyed the more they have seen their own
   countless defects and shortcomings. The more grace they have had the
   more they have been "clothed with humility." (1 Peter v. 5.)

   What saint can be named in God's Word, of whose life many details are
   recorded, who was literally and absolutely perfect? Which of them all,
   when writing about himself, ever talks of feeling free from
   imperfection? On the contrary, men like David, and St. Paul, and St.
   John, declare in the strongest language that they feel in their own
   hearts weakness and sin. The holiest men of modern times have always
   been remarkable for deep humility. Have we ever seen holier men than
   the martyred John Bradford, or Hooker, or Usher, or Baxter, or
   Rutherford, or M'Cheyne? Yet no one can read the writings and letters
   of these men without seeing that they felt themselves "debtors to mercy
   and grace" every day, and the very last thing they ever laid claim to
   was perfection!

   In face of such facts as these I must protest against the language used
   in many quarters, in these last days, about perfection. I must think
   that those who use it either know very little of the nature of sin, or
   of the attributes of God, or of their own hearts, or o� the Bible, or
   of the meaning of words. When a professing Christian coolly tells me
   that he has got beyond such hymns as "Just as I am," and that they are
   below his present experience, though they suited him when he first took
   up religion, I must think his soul is in a very unhealthy state! When a
   man can talk coolly of the possibility of "living without sin" while in
   the body, and can actually say that he has "never had an evil thought
   for three months," I can only say that in my opinion he is a very
   ignorant Christian! I protest against such teaching as this. It not
   only does no good, but does immense harm. It disgusts and alienates
   from religion far-seeing men of the world, who know it is incorrect and
   untrue. It depresses some of the best of God's children, who feel they
   never can attain to "perfection" of this kind. It puffs up many weak
   brethren, who fancy they are something when they are nothing. In short,
   it is a dangerous delusion.

   (4) In the fourth place, is it wise to assert so positively and
   violently, as many do, that the seventh chapter of the Epistle to the
   Romans does not describe the experience of the advanced saint, but the
   experience of the unregenerate man, or of the weak and un-established
   believer? I doubt it.

   I admit fully that the point has been a disputed one for eighteen
   centuries, in fact ever since the days of St. Paul. I admit fully that
   eminent Christians like John and Charles Wesley, and Fletcher, a
   hundred years ago, to say nothing of some able writers of our own time,
   maintain firmly that St. Paul was not describing his own present
   experience when he wrote this seventh chapter. I admit fully that many
   cannot see what I and many others do see: viz., that Paul says nothing
   in this chapter which does not precisely tally with the recorded
   experience of the most eminent saints in every age, and that he does
   say several things which no unregenerate man or weak believer would
   ever think of saying, and cannot say. So, at any rate, it appears to
   me. But I will not enter into any detailed discussion of the chapter.
   [2]

   What I do lay stress upon is the broad fact that the best commentators
   in every era of the Church have almost invariably applied the seventh
   chapter of Romans to advanced believers. The commentators who do not
   take this view have been, with a few bright exceptions, the Romanists,
   the Socinians, and the Arminians. Against them is arrayed the judgment
   of almost all the Reformers, almost all the Puritans, and the best
   modern Evangelical divines. I shall be told, of course, that no man is
   infallible, that the Reformers, Puritans, and modern divines I refer to
   may have been entirely mistaken, and the Romanists, Socinians, and
   Arminians may have been quite right! Our Lord has taught us, no doubt,
   to "call no man master." But while I ask no man to call the Reformers
   and Puritans "masters," I do ask people to read what they say on this
   subject, and answer their arguments, if they can. This has not been
   done yet! To say, as some do, that they do not want human "dogmas" and
   "doctrines," is no reply at all. The whole point at issue is, "What is
   the meaning of a passage of Scripture? How is the Seventh chapter of
   the Epistle to the Romans to be interpreted? What is the true sense of
   its words?" At any rate let us remember that there is a great fact
   which cannot be got over. On one side stand the opinions and
   interpretation of Reformers and Puritans, and on the other the opinions
   and interpretations of Romanists, Socinians, and Arminians. Let that be
   distinctly understood.

   In the face of such a fact as this I must enter my protest against the
   sneering, taunting, contemptuous language which has been frequently
   used of late by some of the advocates of what I must call the Arminian
   view of the Seventh of Romans, in speaking of the opinions of their
   opponents. To say the least, such language is unseemly, and only
   defeats its own end. A cause which is defended by such language is
   deservedly suspicious. Truth needs no such weapons. If we cannot agree
   with men, we need not speak of their views with discourtesy and
   contempt. An opinion which is backed and supported by such men as the
   best Reformers and Puritans may not carry conviction to all minds in
   the nineteenth century, but at any rate it would be well to speak of it
   with respect.

   (5) In the fifth place, is it wise to use the language which is often
   used in the present day about the doctrine of "Christ in us"? I doubt
   it. Is not this doctrine often exalted to a position which it does not
   occupy in Scripture? I am afraid that it is.

   That the true believer is one with Christ and Christ in him, no careful
   reader of the New Testament will think of denying for a moment. There
   is, no doubt, a mystical union between Christ and the believer. With
   Him we died, with Him we were buried, with Him we rose again, with Him
   we sit in heavenly places. We have five plain texts where we are
   distinctly taught that Christ is "in us." (Rom. viii. 10; Gal. ii. 20;
   iv. 19; Eph. iii. 17; Col. iii. 11.) But we must be careful that we
   understand what we mean by the expression. That "Christ dwells in our
   hearts by faith," and carries on His inward work by His Spirit, is
   clear and plain. But if we mean to say that beside, and over, and above
   this there is some mysterious indwelling of Christ in a believer, we
   must be careful what we are about. Unless we take care, we shall find
   ourselves ignoring the work of the Holy Ghost. We shall be forgetting
   that in the Divine economy of man's salvation election is the special
   work of God the Father--atonement, mediation, and intercession, the
   special work of God the Son--and sanctification, the special work of
   God the Holy Ghost. We shall be forgetting that our Lord said, when He
   went away, that He would send us another Comforter, who should "abide
   with us" for ever, and, as it were, take His place. (John xiv. 16.) In
   short, under the idea that we are honouring Christ, we shall find that
   we are dishonouring His special and peculiar gift--the Holy Ghost.
   Christ, no doubt, as God, is everywhere--in our hearts, in heaven, in
   the place where two or three are met together in His name. But we
   really must remember that Christ, as our risen Head and High Priest, is
   specially at God's right hand interceding for us until He comes the
   second time; and that Christ carries on His work in the hearts of His
   people by the special work of His Spirit, whom He promised to send when
   He left the world. (John xv. 26.) A comparison of the ninth and tenth
   verses of the eighth chapter of Romans seems to me to show this
   plainly. It convinces me that "Christ in us" means Christ in us "by His
   Spirit." Above all, the words of St. John are most distinct and
   express: "Hereby we know that He abideth in us by the Spirit which He
   hath given us." (1 John iii. 24.)

   In saying all this, I hope no one will misunderstand me. I do not say
   that the expression. "Christ in us" is unscriptural. But I do say that
   I see great danger of giving an extravagant and unscriptural importance
   to the idea contained in the expression; and I do fear that many use it
   now-a-days without exactly knowing what they mean, and unwittingly,
   perhaps, dishonour the mighty work of the Holy Ghost. If any readers
   think that I am needlessly scrupulous about the point, I recommend to
   their notice a curious book by Samuel Rutherford (author of the
   well-known letters), called "The Spiritual Antichrist." They will there
   see that two centuries ago the wildest heresies arose out of an
   extravagant teaching of this very doctrine of the "indwelling of
   Christ" in believers. They will find that Saltmarsh, and Dell, and
   Towne, and other false teachers, against whom good Samuel Rutherford
   contended, began with strange notions of "Christ in us," and then
   proceeded to build on the doctrine antinomianism, and fanaticism of the
   worst description and vilest tendency. They maintained that the
   separate, personal life of the believer was so completely gone, that it
   was Christ living in him who repented, and believed, and acted! The
   root of this huge error was a forced and unscriptural interpretation of
   such texts as "I live: yet not I, but Christ liveth in me." (Gal. ii.
   20.) And the natural result of it was that many of the unhappy
   followers of this school came to the comfortable conclusion that
   believers were not responsible, whatever they might do! Believers,
   forsooth, were dead and buried; and only Christ lived in them, and
   undertook everything for them! The ultimate consequence was, that some
   thought they might sit still in a carnal security, their personal
   accountableness being entirely gone, and might commit any kind of sin
   without fear! Let us never forget that truth, distorted and
   exaggerated, can become the mother of the most dangerous heresies. When
   we speak of "Christ being in us," let us take care to explain what we
   mean. I fear some neglect this in the present day.

   (6) In the sixth place, is it wise to draw such a deep, wide, and
   distinct line of separation between conversion and consecration, or the
   higher life, so called, as many do draw in the present day? Is this
   according to the proportion of God's Word? I doubt it.

   There is, unquestionably, nothing new in this teaching. It is well
   known that Romish writers often maintain that the Church is divided
   into three classes--sinners, penitents, and saints. The modern teachers
   of this day who tell us that professing Christians are of three
   sorts--the unconverted, the converted, and the partakers of the "higher
   life" of complete consecration--appear to me to occupy very much the
   same ground! But whether the idea be old or new, Romish or English, I
   am utterly unable to see that it has any warrant of Scripture. The Word
   of God always speaks of two great divisions of mankind, and two only.
   It speaks of the living and the dead in sin--the believer and the
   unbeliever--the converted and the unconverted--the travellers in the
   narrow way and the travellers in the broad--the wise and the
   foolish--the children of God and the children of the devil. Within each
   of these two great classes there are, doubtless, various measures of
   sin and of grace; but it is only the difference between the higher and
   lower end of an inclined plane. Between these two great classes there
   is an enormous gulf; they are as distinct as life and death, light and
   darkness, heaven and hell. But of a division into three classes the
   Word of God says nothing at all! I question the wisdom of making
   new-fangled divisions which the Bible has not made, and I thoroughly
   dislike the notion of a second conversion.

   That there is a vast difference between one degree of grace and
   another--that spiritual life admits of growth, and that believers
   should be continually urged on every account to grow in grace--all this
   I fully concede. But the theory of a sudden, mysterious transition of a
   believer into a state of blessedness and entire consecration, at one
   mighty bound, I cannot receive. It appears to me to be a man-made
   invention; and I do not see a single plain text to prove it in
   Scripture. Gradual growth in grace, growth in knowledge, growth in
   faith, growth in love, growth in holiness, growth in humility, growth
   in spiritual-mindedness--all this I see clearly taught and urged in
   Scripture, and clearly exemplified in the lives of many of God's
   saints. But sudden, instantaneous leaps from conversion to consecration
   I fail to see in the Bible. I doubt, indeed, whether we have any
   warrant for saying that a man can possibly be converted without being
   consecrated to God! More consecrated he doubtless can be, and will be
   as his grace increases; but if he was not consecrated to God in the
   very day that he was converted and born again, I do not know what
   conversion means. Are not men in danger of undervaluing and underrating
   the immense blessedness of conversion? Are they not, when they urge on
   believers the "higher life" as a second conversion, underrating the
   length, and breadth, and depth, and height, of that great first change
   which Scripture calls the new birth, the new creation, the spiritual
   resurrection? I may be mistaken. But I have sometimes thought, while
   reading the strong language used by many about "consecration," in the
   last few years, that those who use it must have had previously a
   singularly low and inadequate view of "conversion," if indeed they knew
   anything about conversion at all. In short, I have almost suspected
   that when they were consecrated, they were in reality converted for the
   first time!

   I frankly confess I prefer the old paths. I think it wiser and safer to
   press on all converted people the possibility of continual growth in
   grace, and the absolute necessity of going forward, increasing more and
   more, and every year dedicating and consecrating themselves more, in
   spirit, soul, and body, to Christ. By all means let us teach that there
   is more holiness to be attained, and more of heaven to be enjoyed upon
   earth than most believers now experience. But I decline to tell any
   converted man that he needs a second conversion, and that he may some
   day or other pass by one enormous step into a state of entire
   consecration. I decline to teach it, because I cannot see any warrant
   for such teaching in Scripture. I decline to teach it, because I think
   the tendency of the doctrine is thoroughly mischievous, depressing the
   humble-minded and meek, and puffing up the shallow, the ignorant, and
   the self-conceited, to a most dangerous extent.

   (7) In the seventh and last place, is it wise to teach believers that
   they ought not to think so much of fighting and struggling against sin,
   but ought rather to "yield themselves to God" and be passive in the
   hands of Christ? Is this according to the proportion of God's Word? I
   doubt it.

   It is a simple fact that the expression "yield yourselves" is only to
   be found in one place in the New Testament, as a duty urged upon
   believers. That place is in the sixth chapter of Romans, and there
   within six verses the expression occurs five times. (See Rom. vi.
   13-19.) But even there the word will not bear the sense of "placing
   ourselves passively in the hands of another." Any Greek student can
   tell us that the sense is rather that of actively "presenting"
   ourselves for use, employment, and service. (See Rom. xii. 1.) The
   expression therefore stands alone. But, on the other hand, it would not
   be difficult to point out at least twenty-five or thirty distinct
   passages in the Epistles where believers are plainly taught to use
   active personal exertion, and are addressed as responsible for doing
   energetically what Christ would have them do, and are not told to
   "yield themselves" up as passive agents and sit still, but to arise and
   work. A holy violence, a conflict, a warfare, a fight, a soldier's
   life, a wrestling, are spoken of as characteristic of the true
   Christian. The account of "the armour of God" in the sixth chapter of
   Ephesians, one might think, settles the question. [3] --Again, it would
   be easy to show that the doctrine of sanctification without personal
   exertion, by simply "yielding ourselves to God," is precisely the
   doctrine of the antinomian fanatics in the seventeenth century (to whom
   I have referred already, described in Rutherford's Spiritual
   Antichrist), and that the tendency of it is evil in the
   extreme.--Again, it would be easy to show that the doctrine is utterly
   subversive of the whole teaching of such tried and approved books as
   Pilgrim's Progress, and that if we receive it we cannot do better than
   put Bunyan's old book in the fire! If Christian in Pilgrim's Progress
   simply yielded himself to God, and never fought, or struggled, or
   wrestled, I have read the famous allegory in vain. But the plain truth
   is, that men will persist in confounding two things that differ--that
   is, justification and sanctification. In justification the word to be
   addressed to man is believe--only believe; in sanctification the word
   must be "watch, pray, and fight." What God has divided let us not
   mingle and confuse.

   I leave the subject of my introduction here, and hasten to a
   conclusion. I confess that I lay down my pen with feelings of sorrow
   and anxiety. There is much in the attitude of professing Christians in
   this day which fills me with concern, and makes me full of fear for the
   future.

   There is an amazing ignorance of Scripture among many, and a consequent
   want of established, solid religion. In no other way can I account for
   the ease with which people are, like children, "tossed to and fro, and
   carried about by every wind of doctrine." (Eph. iv. 14.) There is an
   Athenian love of novelty abroad, and a morbid distaste for anything old
   and regular, and in the beaten path of our forefathers. Thousands will
   crowd to hear a new voice and a new doctrine, without considering for a
   moment whether what they hear is true.--There is an incessant craving
   after any teaching which is sensational, and exciting, and rousing to
   the feelings.--There is an unhealthy appetite for a sort of spasmodic
   and hysterical Christianity. The religious life of many is little
   better than spiritual dram-drinking, and the "meek and quiet spirit"
   which St. Peter commends is clean forgotten, (1 Peter iii. 4.) Crowds,
   and crying, and hot rooms, and high-flown singing, and an incessant
   rousing of the emotions, are the only things which many care
   for.--Inability to distinguish differences in doctrine is spreading far
   and wide, and so long as the preacher is "clever" and "earnest,"
   hundreds seem to think it must be all right, and call you dreadfully
   "narrow and uncharitable" if you hint that he is unsound I Moody and
   Haweis, Dean Stanley and Canon Liddon, Mackonochie and Pearsall Smith,
   all seem to be alike in the eyes of such people. All this is sad, very
   sad. But if, in addition to this, the true-hearted advocates of
   increased holiness are going to fall out by the way and misunderstand
   one another, it will be sadder still. We shall indeed be in evil
   plight.

   For myself, I am aware that I am no longer a young minister. My mind
   perhaps stiffens, and I cannot easily receive any new doctrine. "The
   old is better." I suppose I belong to the old school of Evangelical
   theology, and I am therefore content with such teaching about
   sanctification as I find in the Life of Faith of Sibbes and of Manton,
   and in The Life, Walk, and Triumph of Faith of William Romaine. But I
   must express a hope that my younger brethren who have taken up new
   views of holiness will beware of multiplying causeless divisions. Do
   they think that a higher standard of Christian living is needed in the
   present day? So do I.--Do they think that clearer, stronger, fuller
   teaching about holiness is needed? So do I.--Do they think that Christ
   ought to be more exalted as the root and author of sanctification as
   well as justification? So do I.--Do they think that believers should be
   urged more and more to live by faith? So do I.--Do they think that a
   very close walk with God should be more pressed on believers as the
   secret of happiness and usefulness? So do I.--In all these things we
   agree. But if they want to go further, then I ask them to take care
   where they tread, and to explain very clearly and distinctly what they
   mean.

   Finally, I must deprecate, and I do it in love, the use of uncouth and
   new-fangled terms and phrases in teaching sanctification. I plead that
   a movement in favour of holiness cannot be advanced by new-coined
   phraseology, or by disproportioned and one-sided statements--or by
   overstraining and isolating particular texts--or by exalting one truth
   at the expense of another--or by allegorizing and accommodating texts,
   and squeezing out of them meanings which the Holy Ghost never put in
   them--or by speaking contemptuously and bitterly of those who do not
   entirely see things with our eyes, and do not work exactly in our ways.
   These things do not make for peace: they rather repel many and keep
   them at a distance. The cause of true sanctification is not helped, but
   hindered, by such weapons as these. A movement in aid of holiness which
   produces strife and dispute among God's children is somewhat
   suspicious. For Christ's sake, and in the name of truth and charity,
   let us endeavour to follow after peace as well as holiness. "What God
   has joined together let not man put asunder."

   It is my heart's desire, and prayer to God daily, that personal
   holiness may increase greatly among professing Christians in England,
   But I trust that all who endeavour to promote it will adhere closely to
   the proportion of Scripture, will carefully distinguish things that
   differ, and will separate "the precious from the vile." (Jer. xv. 19.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] "There is a double justification by God: the one authoritative, the
   other declarative or demonstrative."--The first is St. Paul's scope,
   when he speaks of justification by faith without the deeds of the law.
   The second is St. James' scope, when he speaks of justification by
   works."--T. Goodwin on Gospel Holiness. Works, vol. vii, p. 181.

   [2] Those who care to go into the subject will find it fully discussed
   in the Commentaries of Willet, Elton, Chalmers, and Haldane, and in
   Owen on Indwelling Sin, and in the work of Stafford on the Seventh of
   Romans.

   [3] Old Sibbe's Sermon on "Victorious Violence" deserves the attention
   of all who have his works.--Vol. vii., p. 30.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    HOLINESS
     __________________________________________________________________

I
SIN

   "Sin is the transgression of the law."--1 John iii. 4.

   He that wishes to attain right views about Christian holiness, must
   begin by examining the vast and solemn subject of sin. He must dig down
   very low if he would build high. A mistake here is most mischievous.
   Wrong views about holiness are generally traceable to wrong views about
   human corruption. I make no apology for beginning this volume of papers
   about holiness by making some plain statements about sin.

   The plain truth is that a right knowledge of sin lies at the root of
   all saving Christianity. Without it such doctrines as justification,
   conversion, sanctification, are "words and names" which convey no
   meaning to the mind. The first thing, therefore, that God does when He
   makes anyone a new creature in Christ, is to send light into his heart,
   and show him that he is a guilty sinner. The material creation in
   Genesis began with "light," and so also does the spiritual creation.
   God "shines into our hearts" by the work of the Holy Ghost, and then
   spiritual life begins. (2 Cor. iv. 6.)--Dim or indistinct views of sin
   are the origin of most of the errors, heresies, and false doctrines of
   the present day. If a man does not realize the dangerous nature of his
   soul's disease, you cannot wonder if he is content with false or
   imperfect remedies. I believe that one of the chief wants of the Church
   in the nineteenth century has been, and is, clearer, fuller teaching
   about sin.

   (1) I shall begin the subject by supplying some definition of sin. We
   are all of course familiar with the terms "sin" and "sinners." We talk
   frequently of "sin" being in the world, and of men committing "sins."
   But what do we mean by these terms and phrases? Do we really know? I
   fear there is much mental confusion and haziness on this point. Let me
   try, as briefly as possible, to supply an answer.

   I say, then, that "sin," speaking generally, is, as the Ninth Article
   of our Church declares, "the fault and corruption of the nature of
   every man that is naturally engendered of the offspring of Adam;
   whereby man is very far gone (quam longissime is the Latin) from
   original righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil, so
   that the flesh lusteth alway against the spirit; and, therefore, in
   every person born into the world, it deserveth God's wrath and
   damnation." Sin, in short, is that vast moral disease which affects the
   whole human race, of every rank, and class, and name, and nation, and
   people, and tongue; a disease from which there never was but one born
   of woman that was free. Need I say that One was Christ Jesus the Lord?

   I say, furthermore, that "a sin," to speak more particularly, consists
   in doing, saying, thinking, or imagining, anything that is not in
   perfect conformity with the mind and law of God. "Sin," in short, as
   the Scripture saith, is "the transgression of the law." (1 John iii.
   4.) The slightest outward or inward departure from absolute
   mathematical parallelism with God's revealed will and character
   constitutes a sin, and at once makes us guilty in God's sight.

   Of course I need not tell any one who reads his Bible with attention,
   that a man may break God's law in heart and thought, when there is no
   overt and visible act of wickedness. Our Lord has settled that point
   beyond dispute in the Sermon on the Mount. (Matt. v. 21-28.) Even a
   poet of our own has truly said, "A man may smile and smile, and be a
   villain."

   Again, I need not tell a careful student of the New Testament, that
   there are sins of omission as well as commission, and that we sin, as
   our Prayer-book justly reminds us, by "leaving undone the things we
   ought to do," as really as by "doing the things we ought not to do."
   The solemn words of our Master in the Gospel of St. Matthew place this
   point also beyond dispute. It is there written, "Depart, ye cursed,
   into everlasting fire:--for I was an hungered, and ye gave Me no meat;
   I was thirsty, and ye gave Me no drink." (Matt. xxv. 41, 42.) It was a
   deep and thoughtful saying of holy Archbishop Usher, just before he
   died--"Lord, forgive me all my sins, and specially my sins of
   omission."

   But I do think it necessary in these times to remind my readers that a
   man may commit sin and yet be ignorant of it, and fancy himself
   innocent when he is guilty. I fail to see any Scriptural warrant for
   the modern assertion that "Sin is not sin to us until we discern it and
   are conscious of it." On the contrary, in the 4th and 5th chapters of
   that unduly neglected book, Leviticus, and in the 15th of Numbers, I
   find Israel distinctly taught that there were sins of ignorance which
   rendered people unclean, and needed atonement. (Levit. iv. 1-35; v.
   14-19; Num. xv. 25-29.) And I find our Lord expressly teaching that
   "the servant who knew not his master's will and did it not," was not
   excused on account of his ignorance, but was "beaten" or punished.
   (Luke xii. 48.) We shall do well to remember, that when we make our own
   miserably imperfect knowledge and consciousness the measure of our
   sinfulness, we are on very dangerous ground. A deeper study of
   Leviticus might do us much good.

   (2) Concerning the origin and source of this vast moral disease called
   "sin" I must say something. I fear the views of many professing
   Christians on this point are sadly defective and unsound. I dare not
   pass it by. Let us, then, have it fixed down in our minds that the
   sinfulness of man does not begin from without, but from within. It is
   not the result of bad training in early years. It is not picked up from
   bad companions and bad examples, as some weak Christians are too fond
   of saying. No! it is a family disease, which we all inherit from our
   first parents, Adam and Eve, and with which we are born. Created "in
   the image of God," innocent and righteous at first, our parents fell
   from original righteousness and became sinful and corrupt. And from
   that day to this all men and women are born in the image of fallen Adam
   and Eve, and inherit a heart and nature inclined to evil. "By one man
   sin entered into the world."--"That which is born of the flesh is
   flesh."--"We are by nature children of wrath."--"The carnal mind is
   enmity against God."--"Out of the heart (naturally as out of a
   fountain) proceed evil thoughts, adulteries," and the like. (John iii.
   6; Ephes. ii. 3; Rom. viii. 7; Mark vii. 21.) The fairest babe that has
   entered life this year, and become the sunbeam of a family, is not, as
   its mother perhaps fondly calls it, a little "angel," or a little
   "innocent," but a little "sinner." Alas! as it lies smiling and crowing
   in its cradle, that little creature carries in its heart the seeds of
   every kind of wickedness! Only watch it carefully, as it grows in
   stature and its mind developes, and you will soon detect in it an
   incessant tendency to that which is bad, and a backwardness to that
   which is good. You will see in it the buds and germs of deceit, evil
   temper, selfishness, self-will, obstinacy, greediness, envy, jealousy,
   passion--which, if indulged and let alone, will shoot up with painful
   rapidity. Who taught the child these things? Where did he learn them?
   The Bible alone can answer these questions!--Of all the foolish things
   that parents say about their children there is none worse than the
   common saying, "My son has a good heart at the bottom. He is not what
   he ought to be; but he has fallen into bad hands. Public schools are
   bad places. The tutors neglect the boys. Yet he has a good heart at the
   bottom."--The truth, unhappily, is diametrically the other way. The
   first cause of all sin lies in the natural corruption of the boy's own
   heart, and not in the school.

   (3) Concerning the extent of this vast moral disease of man called sin,
   let us beware that we make no mistake. The only safe ground is that
   which is laid for us in Scripture. "Every imagination of the thoughts
   of his heart" is by nature "evil, and that continually."--"The heart is
   deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked," (Gen. vi. 5; Jer.
   xvii. 9.) Sin is a disease which pervades and runs through every part
   of our moral constitution and every faculty of our minds. The
   understanding, the affections, the reasoning powers, the will, are all
   more or less infected. Even the conscience is so blinded that it cannot
   be depended on as a sure guide, and is as likely to lead men wrong as
   right, unless it is enlightened by the Holy Ghost. In short, "from the
   sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness" about us.
   (Isa. i. 6.) The disease may be veiled under a thin covering of
   courtesy, politeness, good manners, and outward decorum; but it lies
   deep down in the constitution.

   I admit fully that man has many grand and noble faculties left about
   him, and that in arts and sciences and literature he shows immense
   capacity. But the fact still remains that in spiritual things he is
   utterly "dead," and has no natural knowledge, or love, or fear of God.
   His best things are so interwoven and intermingled with corruption,
   that the contrast only brings out into sharper relief the truth and
   extent of the fall. That one and the same creature should be in some
   things so high and in others so low--so great and yet so little--so
   noble and yet so mean--so grand in his conception and execution of
   material things, and yet so grovelling and debased in his
   affections--that he should be able to plan and erect buildings like
   those to Carnac and Luxor in Egypt, and the Parthenon at Athens, and
   yet worship vile gods and goddesses, and birds, and beasts, and
   creeping things--that he should be able to produce tragedies like those
   of �schylus and Sophocles, and histories like that of Thucydides, and
   yet be a slave to abominable vices like those described in the first
   chapter of the Epistle to the Romans--all this is a sore puzzle to
   those who sneer at "God's Word written," and scoff at us as
   Bibliolaters. But it is a knot that we can untie with the Bible in our
   hands. We can acknowledge that man has all the marks of a majestic
   temple about him--a temple in which God once dwelt, but a temple which
   is now in utter ruins--a temple in which a shattered window here, and a
   doorway there, and a column there, still give some faint idea of the
   magnificence of the original design, but a temple which from end to end
   has lost its glory and fallen from its high estate. And we say that
   nothing solves the complicated problem of man's condition but the
   doctrine of original or birth-sin and the crushing effects of the fall.

   Let us remember, besides this, that every part of the world bears
   testimony to the fact that sin is the universal disease of all mankind.
   Search the globe from east to west and from pole to pole--search every
   nation of every clime in the four quarters of the earth--search every
   rank and class in our own country from the highest to the lowest--and
   under every circumstance and condition, the report will be always the
   same. The remotest islands in the Pacific Ocean, completely separate
   from Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, beyond the reach alike of
   Oriental luxury and Western arts and literature--islands inhabited by
   people ignorant of books, money, steam, and gunpowder--uncontaminated
   by the vices of modern civilization--these very islands have always
   been found, when first discovered, the abode of the vilest forms of
   lust, cruelty, deceit, and superstition. If the inhabitants have known
   nothing else, they have always known how to sin! Everywhere the human
   heart is naturally "deceitful above all things, and desperately
   wicked." (Jer. xvii. 9.) For my part, I know no stronger proof of the
   inspiration of Genesis and' the Mosaic account of the origin of man,
   than the power, extent, and universality of sin. Grant that mankind
   have all sprung from one pair, and that this pair fell (as Gen. iii.
   tells us), and the state of human nature everywhere is easily accounted
   for. Deny it, as many do, and you are at once involved in inexplicable
   difficulties. In a word, the uniformity and universality of human
   corruption supply one of the most unanswerable instances of the
   enormous "difficulties of infidelity."

   After all, I am convinced that the greatest proof of the extent and
   power of sin is the pertinacity with which it cleaves to man even after
   he is converted and has become the subject of the Holy Ghost's
   operations. To use the language of the Ninth Article, "this infection
   of nature doth remain--yea, even in them that are regenerate." So
   deeply planted are the roots of human corruption, that even after we
   are born again, renewed, "washed, sanctified, justified," and made
   living members of Christ, these roots remain alive in the bottom of our
   hearts, and, like the leprosy in the walls of the house, we never get
   rid of them until the earthly house of this tabernacle is dissolved.
   Sin, no doubt, in the believer's heart, has no longer dominion. It is
   checked, controlled, mortified, and crucified by the expulsive power of
   the new principle of grace. The life of a believer is a life of
   victory, and not of failure. But the very struggles which go on within
   his bosom, the fight that he finds it needful to fight daily, the
   watchful jealousy which he is obliged to exercise over his inner man,
   the contest between the flesh and the spirit, the inward "groanings"
   which no one knows but he who has experienced them--all, all testify to
   the same great truth, all show the enormous power and vitality of sin.
   Mighty indeed must that foe be who even when crucified is still alive!
   Happy is that believer who understands it, and while he rejoices in
   Christ Jesus has no confidence in the flesh; and while he says, "Thanks
   be unto God who giveth us the victory," never forgets to watch and pray
   lest he fall into temptation!

   (4) Concerning the guilt, vileness, and offensivenesS of sin in the
   sight of God, my words shall be few. I say "few" advisedly. I do not
   think, in the nature of things, that mortal man can at all realize the
   exceeding sinfulness of sin in the sight of that holy and perfect One
   with whom we have to do. On the one hand, God is that eternal Being who
   "chargeth His angels with folly," and in whose sight the very "heavens
   are not clean." He is One who reads thoughts and motives as well as
   actions, and requires "truth in the inward parts." (Job xv. 18; xv. 15;
   Psa. li. 6.) We, on the other hand--poor blind creatures, here to-day
   and gone tomorrow, born in sin, surrounded by sinners, living in a
   constant atmosphere of weakness, infirmity, and imperfection--can form
   none but the most inadequate conceptions of the hideousness of evil. We
   have no line to fathom it, and no measure by which to gauge it. The
   blind man can see no difference between a masterpiece of Titian or
   Raphael, and the Queen's Head on a village signboard. The deaf man
   cannot distinguish between a penny whistle and a cathedral organ. The
   very animals whose smell is most offensive to us have no idea that they
   are offensive, and are not offensive to one another. And man, fallen
   man, I believe, can have no just idea what a vile thing sin is in the
   sight of that God whose handiwork is absolutely perfect--perfect
   whether we look through telescope or microscope--perfect in the
   formation of a mighty planet like Jupiter, with his satellites, keeping
   time to a second as he rolls round the sun--perfect in the formation of
   the smallest insect that crawls over a foot of ground. But let us
   nevertheless settle it firmly in our minds that sin is "the abominable
   thing that God hateth"--that God "is of purer eyes than to behold
   iniquity, and cannot look upon that which is evil"--that the least
   transgression of God's law makes us "guilty of all"--that "the soul
   that sinneth shall die"--that "the wages of sin is death"--that God
   shall "judge the secrets of men"--that there is a worm that never dies,
   and a fire that is not quenched--that "the wicked shall be turned into
   hell"--and "shall go away into everlasting punishment"--and that
   "nothing that defiles shall in any wise enter heaven." (Jer. xliv. 4;
   Hab. i. 13; James ii. 10; Ezek. xviii. 4; Rom. vi. 23; Rom. ii. 16;
   Mark ix. 44; Ps. ix. 17; Matt. xxv. 46; Rev. xxi. 27.) These are indeed
   tremendous words, when we consider that they are written in the Book of
   a most merciful God!

   No proof of the fulness of sin, after all, is so overwhelming and
   unanswerable as the cross and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
   whole doctrine of His substitution and atonement. Terribly black must
   that guilt be for which nothing but the blood of the Son of God could
   make satisfaction. Heavy must that weight of human sin be which made
   Jesus groan and sweat drops of blood in agony at Gethsemane, and cry at
   Golgotha, "My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?" (Matt. xxvii.
   46.) Nothing, I am convinced, will astonish us so much, when we awake
   in the resurrection day, as the view we shall have of sin, and the
   retrospect we shall take of our own countless shortcomings and defects.
   Never till the hour when Christ comes the second time shall we fully
   realize the "sinfulness of sin." Well might George Whitfield say, "The
   anthem in heaven will be, What hath God wrought!"

   (5) One point only remains to be considered on the subject of sin,
   which I dare not pass over. That point is its deceitfulness. It is a
   point of most serious importance, and I venture to think it does not
   receive the attention which it deserves. You may see this deceitfulness
   in the wonderful proneness of men to regard sin as less sinful and
   dangerous than it is in the sight of God; and in their readiness to
   extenuate it, make excuses for it, and minimize its guilt.--"It is but
   a little one! God is merciful! God is not extreme to mark what is done
   amiss! We mean well! One cannot be so particular! Where is the mighty
   harm? We only do as others!" Who is not familiar with this kind of
   language?--You may see it in the long string of smooth words and
   phrases which men have coined in order to designate things which God
   calls downright wicked and ruinous to the soul. What do such
   expressions as "fast," "gay," "wild," "unsteady," "thoughtless,"
   "loose" mean? They show that men try to cheat themselves into the
   belief that sin is not quite so sinful as God says it is, and that they
   are not so bad as they really are.--You may see it in the tendency even
   of believers to indulge their children in questionable practices, and
   to bind their own eyes to the inevitable result of the love of money,
   of tampering with temptation, and sanctioning a low standard of family
   religion.--I fear we do not sufficiently realize the extreme subtlety
   of our soul's disease. We are too apt to forget that temptation to sin
   will rarely present itself to us in its true colours, saying, "I am
   your deadly enemy, and I want to ruin you for ever in hell." Oh, no!
   sin comes to us, like Judas, with a kiss; and like Joab, with an
   outstretched hand and flattering words. The forbidden fruit seemed good
   and desirable to Eve; yet it cast her out of Eden. The walking idly on
   his palace roof seemed harmless enough to David; yet it ended in
   adultery and murder. Sin rarely seems sin at first beginnings. Let us
   then watch and pray, lest we fall into temptation. We may give
   wickedness smooth names, but we cannot alter its nature and character
   in the sight of God. Let us remember St. Paul's words: "Exhort one
   another daily, lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin."
   (Heb. iii. 13.) It is a wise prayer in our Litany, "From the deceits of
   the world, the flesh, and the devil, good Lord, deliver us."

   And now, before I go further, let me briefly mention two thoughts which
   appear to me to rise with irresistible force out of the subject.

   On the one hand, I ask my readers to observe what deep reasons we all
   have for humiliation and self-abasement. Let us sit down before the
   picture of sin displayed to us in the Bible, and consider what guilty,
   vile, corrupt creatures we all are in the sight of God. What need we
   all have of that entire change of heart called regeneration, new birth,
   or conversion! What a mass of infirmity and imperfection cleaves to the
   very best of us at our very best! What a solemn thought it is, that
   "without holiness no man shall see the Lord!" (Heb. xii. 14.) What
   cause we have to cry with the publican, every night in our lives, when
   we think of our sins of omission as well as commission, "God be
   merciful to me a sinner!" (Luke xviii. 13.) How admirably suited are
   the general and Communion Confessions of the Prayer-book to the actual
   condition of all professing Christians! How well that language suits
   God's children which the Prayer-book puts in the mouth of every
   Churchman before he goes up to the Communion Table--"The remembrance of
   our misdoings is grievous unto us; the burden is intolerable. Have
   mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, most merciful Father; for Thy Son
   our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgive us all that is past." How true it
   is that the holiest saint is in himself a miserable sinner," and a
   debtor to mercy and grace to the last moment of his existence!

   With my whole heart I subscribe to that passage in Hooker's sermon on
   Justification, which begins, "Let the holiest and best things we do be
   considered. We are never better affected unto God than when we pray;
   yet when we pray, how are our affections many times distracted! How
   little reverence do we show unto the grand majesty of God unto whom we
   speak. How little remorse of our own miseries! How little taste of the
   sweet influence of His tender mercies do we feel! Are we not as
   unwilling many times to begin, and as glad to make an end, as if in
   saying, Call upon Me,' He had set us a very burdensome task? It may
   seem somewhat extreme, which I will speak; therefore, let every one
   judge of it, even as his own heart shall tell him, and not otherwise; I
   will but only make a demand! If God should yield unto us, not as unto
   Abraham--If fifty, forty, thirty, twenty--yea, or if ten good persons
   could be found in a city, for their sakes this city should not be
   destroyed; but, and if He should make us an offer thus large, search
   all the generations of men since the fall of our father Adam, find one
   man that hath done one action which hath passed from him pure, without
   any stain or blemish at all; and for that one man's only action neither
   man nor angel should feel the torments which are prepared for both. Do
   you think that this ransom to deliver men and angels could be found to
   be among the sons of men? The best things which we do have somewhat in
   them to be pardoned." [4]

   That witness is true. For my part I am persuaded the more light we
   have, the more we see our own sinfulness: the nearer we get to heaven,
   the more we are clothed with humility. In every age of the Church you
   will find it true, if you will study biographies, that the most eminent
   saints--men like Bradford, Rutherford, and McCheyne--have always been
   the humblest men.

   On the other hand, I ask my readers to observe how deeply thankful we
   ought to be for the glorious Gospel of the grace of God. There is a
   remedy revealed for man's need, as wide and broad and deep as man's
   disease. We need not be afraid to look at sin, and study its nature,
   origin, power, extent, and vileness, if we only look at the same time
   at the Almighty medicine provided for us in the salvation that is in
   Jesus Christ. Though sin has abounded, grace has much more abounded.
   Yes: in the everlasting covenant of redemption, to which Father, Son,
   and Holy Ghost are parties--in the Mediator of that covenant, Jesus
   Christ the righteous, perfect God and perfect Man in one Person--in the
   work that He did by dying for our sins and rising again for our
   justification--in the offices that He fills as our Priest, Substitute,
   Physician, Shepherd, and Advocate--in the precious blood He shed which
   can cleanse from all sin--in the everlasting righteousness that He
   brought in--in the perpetual intercession that He carries on as our
   Representative at God's right hand--in His power to save to the
   uttermost the chief of sinners, His willingness to receive and pardon
   the vilest, His readiness to bear with the weakest--in the grace of the
   Holy Spirit which He plants in the hearts of all His people, renewing,
   sanctifying and causing old things to pass away and all things to
   become new--in all this--and oh, what a brief sketch it is!--in all
   this, I say, there is a full, perfect, and complete medicine for the
   hideous disease of sin. Awful and tremendous as the right view of sin
   undoubtedly is, no one need faint and despair if he will take a right
   view of Jesus Christ at the same time. No wonder that old Flavel ends
   many a chapter of his admirable "Fountain of Life" with the touching
   words, "Blessed be God for Jesus Christ."

   In bringing this mighty subject to a close, I feel that I have only
   touched the surface of it. It is one which cannot be thoroughly handled
   in a paper like this. He that would see it treated fully and
   exhaustively must turn to such masters of experimental theology as
   Owen, and Burgess, and Manton, and Charnock, and the other giants of
   the Puritan school. On subjects like this there are no writers to be
   compared to the Puritans. It only remains for me to point out some
   practical uses to which the whole doctrine of sin may be profitably
   turned in the present day.

   (a) I say, then, in the first place, that a Scriptural view of sin is
   one of the best antidotes to that vague, dim, misty, hazy kind of
   theology which is so painfully current in the present age. It is vain
   to shut our eyes to the fact that there is a vast quantity of so-called
   Christianity now-a-days which you cannot declare positively unsound,
   but which, nevertheless, is not full measure, good weight, and sixteen
   ounces to the pound. It is a Christianity in which there is undeniably
   "something about Christ, and something about grace, and something about
   faith, and something about repentance, and something about holiness";
   but it is not the real "thing as it is" in the Bible. Things are out of
   place, and out of proportion. As old Latimer would have said, it is a
   kind of "mingle-mangle," and does no good. It neither exercises
   influence on daily conduct, nor comforts in life, nor gives peace in
   death; and those who hold it often awake too late to find that they
   have got nothing solid under their feet. Now I believe the likeliest
   way to cure and mend this defective kind of religion is to bring
   forward more prominently the old Scriptural truth about the sinfulness
   of sin. People will never set their faces decidedly towards heaven, and
   live like pilgrims, until they really feel that they are in danger of
   hell. Let us all try to revive the old teaching about sin, in
   nurseries, in schools, in training colleges, in Universities. Let us
   not forget that "the law is good if we use it lawfully," and that "by
   the law is the knowledge of sin." (1 Tim. i. 8; Rom. iii. 20; vii. 7.)
   Let us bring the law to the front and press it on men's attention. Let
   us expound and beat out the Ten Commandments, and show the length, and
   breadth, and depth, and height of their requirements. This is the way
   of our Lord in the Sermon on the Mount. We cannot do better than follow
   His plan. We may depend upon it, men will never come to Jesus, and stay
   with Jesus, and live for Jesus, unless they really know why they are to
   come, and what is their need. Those whom the Spirit draws to Jesus are
   those whom the Spirit has convinced of sin. Without thorough conviction
   of sin, men may seem to come to Jesus and follow Him for a season, but
   they will soon fall away and return to the world.

   (b) In the next place, a Scriptural view of sin is one of the best
   antidotes to the extravagantly broad and liberal theology which is so
   much in vogue at the present time. The tendency of modern thought is to
   reject dogmas, creeds, and every kind of bounds in religion. It is
   thought grand and wise to condemn no opinion whatsoever, and to
   pronounce all earnest and clever teachers to be trustworthy, however
   heterogeneous and mutually destructive their opinions may
   be.--Everything forsooth is true, and nothing is false! Everybody is
   right, and nobody is wrong! Everybody is likely to be saved, and nobody
   is to be lost!--The Atonement and Substitution of Christ, the
   personality of the devil, the miraculous element in Scripture, the
   reality and eternity of future punishment, all these mighty
   foundation-stones are coolly tossed overboard, like lumber, in order to
   lighten the ship of Christianity, and enable it to keep pace with
   modern science.--Stand up for these great verities, and you are called
   narrow, illiberal, old-fashioned, and a theological fossil! Quote a
   text, and you are told that all truth is not confined to the pages of
   an ancient Jewish Book, and that free inquiry has found out many things
   since the Book was completed!--Now, I know nothing so likely to
   counteract this modern plague as constant clear statements about the
   nature, reality, vileness, power, and guilt of sin. We must charge home
   into the consciences of these men of broad views, and demand a plain
   answer to some plain questions. We must ask them to lay their hands on
   their hearts, and tell us whether their favourite opinions comfort them
   in the day of sickness, in the hour of death, by the bedside of dying
   parents, by the grave of beloved wife or child. We must ask them
   whether a vague earnestness, without definite doctrine, gives them
   peace at seasons like these. We must challenge them to tell us whether
   they do not sometimes feel a gnawing "something" within, which all the
   free inquiry and philosophy and science in the world cannot satisfy.
   And then we must tell them that this gnawing "something" is the sense
   of sin, guilt, and corruption, which they are leaving out in their
   calculations. And, above all, we must tell them that nothing will ever
   make them feel rest, but submission to the old doctrines of man's ruin
   and Christ's redemption, and simple childlike faith in Jesus.

   (c) In the next place, a right view of sin is the best antidote to that
   sensuous, ceremonial, formal kind of Christianity, which has swept over
   England like a flood in the last twenty-five years, and carried away so
   many before it. I can well believe that there is much that is
   attractive in this system of religion, to a certain order of minds, so
   long as the conscience is not fully enlightened. But when that
   wonderful part of our constitution called conscience is really awake
   and alive, I find it hard to believe that a sensuous ceremonial
   Christianity will thoroughly satisfy us. A little child is easily
   quieted and amused with gaudy toys, and dolls, and rattles, so long as
   it is not hungry; but once let it feel the cravings of nature within,
   and we know that nothing will satisfy it but food. Just so it is with
   man in the matter of his soul. Music, and flowers, and candles, and
   incense, and banners, and processions, and beautiful vestments, and
   confessionals, and man-made ceremonies of a semi-Romish character, may
   do well enough for him under certain conditions. But once let him
   "awake and arise from the dead," and he will not rest content with
   these things. They will seem to him mere solemn triflings, and a waste
   of time. Once let him see his sin, and he must see his Saviour. He
   feels stricken with a deadly disease, and nothing will satisfy him but
   the great Physician. He hungers and thirsts, and he must have nothing
   less than the bread of life. I may seem bold in what I am about to say;
   but I fearlessly venture the assertion, that four-fifths of the
   semi-Romanism of the last quarter of a century would never have existed
   if English people had been taught more fully and clearly the nature,
   vileness, and sinfulness of sin.

   (d) In the next place, a right view of sin is one of the best antidotes
   to the overstrained theories of Perfection, of which we hear so much in
   these times. I shall say but little about this, and in saying it I
   trust I shall not give offence. If those who press on us perfection
   mean nothing more than an all-round consistency, and a careful
   attention to all the graces which make up the Christian character,
   reason would that we should not only bear with them, but agree with
   them entirely. By all means let us aim high.--But if men really mean to
   tell us that here in this world a believer can attain to entire freedom
   from sin, live for years in unbroken and uninterrupted communion with
   God, and feel for months together not so much as one evil thought, I
   must honestly say that such an opinion appears to me very
   unscriptural.--I go even further. I say that the opinion is very
   dangerous to him that holds it, and very likely to depress, discourage,
   and keep back inquirers after salvation. I cannot find the slightest
   warrant in God's Word for expecting such perfection as this while we
   are in the body. I believe the words of our Fifteenth Article are
   strictly true--that "Christ alone is without sin; and that all we, the
   rest, though baptized and born again in Christ, offend in many things;
   and if we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth
   is not in us."--To use the language of our first Homily, "There be
   imperfections in our best works: we do not love God so much as we are
   bound to do, with all our hearts, mind, and power; we do not fear God
   so much as we ought to do; we do not pray to God but with many and
   great imperfections. We give, forgive, believe, live, and hope
   imperfectly; we speak, think, and do imperfectly; we fight against the
   devil, the world, and the flesh imperfectly. Let us, therefore, not be
   ashamed to confess plainly our state of imperfections."--Once more I
   repeat what I have said, the best preservative against this temporary
   delusion about perfection which clouds some minds--for such I hope I
   may call it--is a clear, full, distinct understanding of the nature,
   sinfulness, and deceitfulness of sin.

   (e) In the last place, a Scriptural view of sin will prove an admirable
   antidote to them low views of personal holiness which are so painfully
   prevalent in these last days of the Church. This is a very painful and
   delicate subject, I know; but I dare not turn away from it. It has long
   been my sorrowful conviction that the standard of daily life among
   professing Christians in this country has been gradually falling. I am
   afraid that Christ-like charity, kindness, good-temper, unselfishness,
   meekness, gentleness, good-nature, self-denial, zeal to do good, and
   separation from the world, are far less appreciated than they ought to
   be, and than they used to be in the days of our fathers.

   Into the causes of this state of things I cannot pretend to enter
   fully, and can only suggest conjectures for consideration. It may be
   that a certain profession of religion has become so fashionable and
   comparatively easy in the present age, that the streams which were once
   narrow and deep have become wide and shallow, and what we have gained
   in outward show we have lost in quality. It may be that the vast
   increase of wealth in the last twenty-five years has insensibly
   introduced a plague of worldliness, and self-indulgence, and love of
   ease into social life. What were once called luxuries are now comforts
   and necessaries, and self-denial and "enduring hardness" are
   consequently little known. It may be that the enormous amount of
   controversy which marks this age has insensibly dried up our spiritual
   life. We have too often been content with zeal for orthodoxy, and have
   neglected the sober realities of daily practical godliness. Be the
   causes what they may, I must declare my own belief that the result
   remains. There has been of late years a lower standard of personal
   holiness among believers than there used to be in the days of our
   fathers. The whole result is that the spirit is grieved! and the matter
   calls for much humiliation and searching of heart.

   As to the best remedy for the state of things I have mentioned, I shall
   venture to give an opinion. Other schools of thought in the Churches
   must judge for themselves. The cure for Evangelical Churchmen, I am
   convinced, is to be found in a clearer apprehension of the nature and
   sinfulness of sin. We need not go back to Egypt, and borrow semi-Romish
   practices in order to revive our spiritual life. We need not restore
   the confessional, or return to monasticism or asceticism. Nothing of
   the kind! We must simply repent and do our first works. We must return
   to first principles. We must go back to "the old paths." We must sit
   down humbly in the presence of God, look the whole subject in the face,
   examine clearly what the Lord Jesus calls sin, and what the Lord Jesus
   calls "doing His will." We must then try to realize that it is terribly
   possible to live a careless, easy-going, half-worldly life, and yet at
   the same time to maintain Evangelical principles and call ourselves
   Evangelical people! Once let us see that sin is far viler, and far
   nearer to us, and sticks more closely to us than we supposed, and we
   shall be led, I trust and believe, to get nearer to Christ. Once drawn
   nearer to Christ, we shall drink more deeply out of His fullness, and
   learn more thoroughly to "live the life of faith" in Him, as St. Paul
   did. Once taught to live the life of faith in Jesus, and abiding in
   Him, we shall bear more fruit, shall find ourselves more strong for
   duty, more patient in trial, more watchful over our poor weak hearts,
   and more like our Master in all our little daily ways. Just in
   proportion as we realize how much Christ has done for us, shall we
   labour to do much for Christ. Much forgiven, we shall love much. In
   short, as the Apostle says, "with open face beholding as in a glass the
   glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same image even as by the
   Spirit of the Lord." (2 Cor. iii. 18.)

   Whatever some may please to think or say, there can be no doubt that an
   increased feeling about holiness is one of the signs of the times.
   Conferences for the promotion of "spiritual life" are becoming common
   in the present day. The subject of "spiritual life" finds a place on
   Congress platforms almost every year. It has awakened an amount of
   interest and general attention throughout the land, for which we ought
   to be thankful. An^ movement, based on sound principles, which helps to
   deepen our spiritual life and increase our personal holiness, will be a
   real blessing to the Church of England. It will do much to draw us
   together and heal our unhappy divisions. It may bring down some fresh
   out-pouring of the grace of the Spirit, and be "life from the dead" in
   these later times. But sure I am, as I said in the beginning of this
   paper, we must begin low, if we would build high, I am convinced that
   the first step towards attaining a higher standard of holiness is to
   realize more fully the amazing sinfulness of sin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4] Hooker's "Learned Discourse of Justification."
     __________________________________________________________________

II.
SANCTIFICATION

   "Sanctify them through Thy truth."--John xvii. 17.

   "This is the will of God, even your sanctification."--1 Thess. iv. 3.

   The subject of sanctification is one which many, I fear, dislike
   exceedingly. Some even turn from it with scorn and disdain. The very
   last thing they would like is to be a "saint," or a "sanctified" man.
   Yet the subject does not deserve to be treated in this way. It is not
   an enemy, but a friend.

   It is a subject of the utmost importance to our souls. If the Bible be
   true, it is certain that unless we are "sanctified," we shall not be
   saved. There are three things which, according to the Bible, are
   absolutely necessary to the salvation of every man and woman in
   Christendom. These three are, justification, regeneration, and
   sanctification. All three meet in every child of God: he is both born
   again, and justified, and sanctified. He that lacks any one of these
   three things is not a true Christian in the sight of God, and dying in
   that condition will not be found in heaven and glorified in the last
   day.

   It is a subject which is peculiarly seasonable in the present day.
   Strange doctrines have risen up of late upon the whole subject of
   sanctification. Some appear to confound it with justification. Others
   fritter it away to nothing, under the pretence of zeal for free grace,
   and practically neglect it altogether. Others are so much afraid of
   "works" being made a part of justification, that they can hardly find
   any place at all for "works" in their religion. Others set up a wrong
   standard of sanctification before their eyes, and failing to attain it,
   waste their lives in repeated secessions from church to church, chapel
   to chapel, and sect to sect, in the vain hope that they will find what
   they want. In a day like this, a calm examination of the subject, as a
   great leading doctrine of the Gospel, may be of great use to our souls.

   I. Let us consider, firstly, the true nature of sanctification.

   II. Let us consider, secondly, the visible marks of sanctification.

   III. Let us consider, lastly, wherein justification and sanctification
   agree and are like one another, and wherein they differ and are unlike.

   If, unhappily, the reader of these pages is one of those who care for
   nothing but this world, and make no profession of religion, I cannot
   expect him to take much interest in what I am writing. You will
   probably think it an affair of "words, and names," and nice questions,
   about which it matters nothing what you hold and believe. But if you
   are a thoughtful, reasonable, sensible Christian, I venture to say that
   you will find it worth while to have some clear ideas about
   sanctification.

   I. In the first place, we have to consider the nature of
   sanctification. What does the Bible mean when it speaks of a
   "sanctified" man?

   Sanctification is that inward spiritual work which the Lord Jesus
   Christ works in a man by the Holy Ghost, when He calls him to be a true
   believer. He not only washes him from his sins in His own blood, but He
   also separates him from his natural love of sin and the world, puts a
   new principle in his heart, and makes him practically godly in life.
   The instrument by which the Spirit effects this work is generally the
   Word of God, though He sometimes uses afflictions and providential
   visitations "without the Word." (1 Peter iii. 1.) The subject of this
   work of Christ by His Spirit is called in Scripture a "sanctified" man.
   [5]

   He who supposes that Jesus Christ only lived and died and rose again in
   order to provide justification and forgiveness of sins for His people,
   has yet much to learn. Whether he knows it or not, he is dishonouring
   our blessed Lord, and making Him only a half Saviour. The Lord Jesus
   has undertaken everything that His people's souls require; not only to
   deliver them from the guilt of their sins by His atoning death, but
   from the dominion of their sins, by placing in their hearts the Holy
   Spirit; not only to justify them, but also to sanctify them. He is,
   thus, not only their "righteousness," but their "sanctification." (1
   Cor. i. 30.) Let us hear what the Bible says: "For their sakes I
   sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified."--"Christ loved
   the Church, and gave Himself for it; that He might sanctify and cleanse
   it."--"Christ gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from all
   iniquity, and purify unto Himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
   works."--"Christ bore our sins in His own body on the tree, that we,
   being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness."--"Christ hath
   reconciled (you) in the body of His flesh through death, to present you
   holy and unblameable and unreproveable in His sight." (John xvii. 19;
   Ephes. v. 25; Titus ii. 14; 1 Peter ii. 24; Coloss. i. 22.) Let the
   meaning of these five texts be carefully considered. If words mean
   anything, they teach that Christ undertakes the sanctification, no less
   than the justification of His believing people. Both are alike provided
   for in that "everlasting covenant ordered in all things and sure," of
   which the Mediator is Christ. In fact, Christ in one place is called
   "He that sanctifieth," and His People, "they who are sanctified." (Heb.
   ii. 11.)

   The subject before us is of such deep and vast importance, that it
   requires fencing, guarding, clearing up, and marking out on every side.
   A doctrine which is needful to salvation can never be too sharply
   developed, or brought too fully into light. To clear away the confusion
   between doctrines and doctrines, which is so unhappily common among
   Christians, and to map out the precise relation between truths and
   truths in religion, is one way to attain accuracy in our theology. I
   shall therefore not hesitate to lay before my readers a series of
   connected propositions or statements, drawn from Scripture, which I
   think will be found useful in defining the exact nature of
   sanctification.

   (1) Sanctification, then, is the invariable result of that vital union
   with Christ which true faith gives to a Christian.--"He that abideth in
   Me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit." (John xv. 5.)
   The branch which bears no fruit is no living branch of the vine. The
   union with Christ which produces no effect on heart and life is a mere
   formal union, which is worthless before God. The faith which has not a
   sanctifying influence on the character is no better than the faith of
   devils. It is a "dead faith, because it is alone." It is not the gift
   of God. It is not the faith of God's elect. In short, where there is no
   sanctification of life, there is no real faith in Christ. True faith
   worketh by love. In constrains a man to live unto the Lord from a deep
   sense of gratitude for redemption. It makes him feel that he can never
   do too much for Him that died for him. Being much forgiven, he loves
   much. He whom the blood cleanses, walks in the light. He who has real
   lively hope in Christ, purifieth himself even as He is pure. (James ii.
   17-20; Titus i. 1; Gal. v. 6; 1 John i. 7; iii. 3.)

   (2) Sanctification, again, is the outcome and inseparable consequence
   of regeneration. He that is born again and made a new creature,
   receives a new nature and a new principle, and always lives a new life.
   A regeneration which a man can have, and yet live carelessly in sin or
   worldliness, is a regeneration invented by uninspired theologians, but
   never mentioned in Scripture. On the contrary, St. John expressly says,
   that "He that is born of God doth not commit sin--doeth
   righteousness--loveth the brethren--keepeth himself--and overcometh the
   world." (1 John ii. 29; iii. 9-14; v. 4-18.) In a word, where there is
   no sanctification there is no regeneration, and where there is no holy
   life there is no new birth. This is, no doubt, a hard saying to many
   minds; but, hard or not, it is simple Bible truth. It is written
   plainly, that he who is born of God is one whose "seed remaineth in
   him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God." (1 John iii. 9.)

   (3) Sanctification, again, is the only certain evidence of that
   indwelling of the Holy Spirit which is essential to salvation. "If any
   man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." (Rom. viii. 9.)
   The Spirit never lies dormant and idle within the soul: He always makes
   His presence known by the fruit He causes to be borne in heart,
   character, and life. "The fruit of the Spirit," says St. Paul, "is
   love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
   meekness, temperance," and such like. (Gal. v. 22.) Where these things
   are to be found, there is the Spirit: where these things are wanting,
   men are dead before God. The Spirit is compared to the wind, and, like
   the wind, He cannot be seen by our bodily eyes. But just as we know
   there is a wind by the effect it produces on waves, and trees, and
   smoke, so we may know the Spirit is in a man by the effects He produces
   in the man's conduct. It is nonsense to suppose that we have the
   Spirit, if we do not also "walk in the Spirit." (Gal. v. 25.) We may
   depend on it as a positive certainty, that where there is no holy
   living, there is no Holy Ghost. The seal that the Spirit stamps on
   Christ's people is sanctification. As many as are actually "led by the
   Spirit of God, they," and they only, "are the sons of God." (Rom. viii.
   14.)

   (4) Sanctification, again, is the only sure mark of God's election. The
   names and number of the elect are a secret thing, no doubt, which God
   has wisely kept in His own power, and not revealed to man. It is not
   given to us in this world to study the pages of the book of life, and
   see if our names are there. But if there is one thing clearly and
   plainly laid down about election, it is this--that elect men and women
   may be known and distinguished by holy lives. It is expressly written
   that they are "elect through sanctification--chosen unto salvation
   through sanctification--predestinated to be conformed to the image of
   God's Son--and chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world that
   they should be holy."--Hence, when St. Paul saw the working "faith" and
   labouring "love" and patient "hope" of the Thessalonian believers, he
   says, "I know your election of God." (1 Peter i. 2; 2 Thess. ii. 13;
   Rom. viii. 29; Eph. i. 4; 1 Thess. i. 3, 4.) He that boasts of being
   one of God's elect, while he is wilfully and habitually living in sin,
   is only deceiving himself, and talking wicked blasphemy. Of course it
   is hard to know what people really are, and many who make a fair show
   outwardly in religion, may turn out at last to be rotten-hearted
   hypocrites. But where there is not, at least, some appearance of
   sanctification, we may be quite certain there is no election. The
   Church Catechism correctly and wisely teaches that the Holy Ghost
   "sanctifieth all the elect people of God."

   (5) Sanctification, again, is a thing that will always be seen. Like
   the Great Head of the Church, from whom it springs, it "cannot be hid."
   "Every tree is known by his own fruit." (Luke vi. 44.) A truly
   sanctified person may be so clothed with humility, that he can see in
   himself nothing but infirmity and defects. Like Moses, when he came
   down from the Mount, he may not be conscious that his face shines. Like
   the righteous, in the mighty parable of the sheep and the goats, he may
   not see that he has done anything worthy of his Master's notice and
   commendation: "When saw we Thee an hungered, and fed Thee?" (Matt. xxv.
   37.) But whether he sees it himself or not, others will always see in
   him a tone, and taste, and character, and habit of life unlike that of
   other men. The very idea of a man being "sanctified," while no holiness
   can be seen in his life, is flat nonsense and a misuse of words. Light
   may be very dim; but if there is only a spark in a dark room it will be
   seen. Life may be very feeble; but if the pulse only beats a little, it
   will be felt. It is just the same with a sanctified man: his
   sanctification will be something felt and seen, though he himself may
   not understand it. A "saint" in whom nothing can be seen but
   worldliness or sin, is a kind of monster not recognised in the Bible!

   (6) Sanctification, again, is a thing for which every believer is
   responsible. In saying this I would not be mistaken. I hold as strongly
   as anyone that every man on earth is accountable to God, and that all
   the lost will be speechless and without excuse at the last day. Every
   man has power to "lose his own soul." (Matt. xvi. 26.) But while I hold
   this, I maintain that believers are eminently and peculiarly
   responsible, and under a special obligation to live holy lives. They
   are not as others, dead and blind and unrenewed: they are alive unto
   God, and have light and knowledge, and a new principle within them.
   Whose fault is it if they are not holy, but their own? On whom can they
   throw the blame if they are not sanctified, but themselves? God, who
   has given them grace and a new heart, and a new nature, has deprived
   them of all excuse if they do not live for His praise. This is a point
   which is far too much forgotten. A man who professes to be a true
   Christian, while he sits still, content with a very low degree of
   sanctification (if indeed he has any at all), and coolly tells you he
   "can do nothing," is a very pitiable sight, and a very ignorant man.
   Against this delusion let us watch and be on our guard. The Word of God
   always addresses its precepts to believers as accountable and
   responsible beings. If the Saviour of sinners gives us renewing grace,
   and calls us by His Spirit, we may be sure that He expects us to use
   our grace, and not to go to sleep. It is forgetfulness of this which
   causes many believers to "grieve the Holy Spirit," and makes them very
   useless and uncomfortable Christians.

   (7) Sanctification, again, is a thing which admits of growth and
   degrees. A man may climb from one step to another in holiness, and be
   far more sanctified at one period of his life than another. More
   pardoned and more justified than he is when he first believes, he
   cannot be, though he may feel it more. More sanctified he certainly may
   be, because every grace in his new character may be strengthened,
   enlarged, and deepened. This is the evident meaning of our Lord's last
   prayer for His disciples, when He used the words, "Sanctify them"; and
   of St. Paul's prayer for the Thessalonians, "The very God of peace
   sanctify you." (John xvii. 17; 1 Thess. iv. 3.) In both cases the
   expression plainly implies the possibility of increased sanctification;
   while such an expression as "justify them" is never once in Scripture
   applied to a believer, because he cannot be more justified than he is.
   I can find no warrant in Scripture for the doctrine of "imputed
   sanctification." It is a doctrine which seems to me to confuse things
   that differ, and to lead to very evil consequences. Not least, it is a
   doctrine which is flatly contradicted by the experience of all the most
   eminent Christians. If there is any point on which God's holiest saints
   agree it is this: that they see more, and know more, and feel more, and
   do more, and repent more, and believe more, as they get on in spiritual
   life, and in proportion to the closeness of their walk with God. In
   short, they "grow in grace," as St. Peter exhorts believers to do; and
   "abound more and more," according to the words of St. Paul. (2 Pet.
   iii. 18; 1 Thess. iv. 1.)

   (8) Sanctification, again, is a thing which depends greatly on a
   diligent use of Scriptural means. When I speak of "means," I have in
   view Bible-reading, private prayer, regular attendance on public
   worship, regular hearing of God's Word, and regular reception of the
   Lord's Supper. I lay it down as a simple matter of fact, that no one
   who is careless about such things must ever expect to make much
   progress in sanctification. I can find no record of any eminent saint
   who ever neglected them. They are appointed channels through which the
   Holy Spirit conveys fresh supplies of grace to the soul, and
   strengthens the work which He has begun in the inward man. Let men call
   this legal doctrine if they please, but I will never shrink from
   declaring my belief that there are no "spiritual gains without pains."
   I should as soon expect a farmer to prosper in business who contented
   himself with sowing his fields and never looking at them till harvest,
   as expect a believer to attain much holiness who was not diligent about
   his Bible-reading, his prayers, and the use of his Sundays. Our God is
   a God who works by means, and He will never bless the soul of that man
   who pretends to be so high and spiritual that he can get on without
   them.

   (9) Sanctification, again, is a thing which does not prevent a man
   having a great deal of inward spiritual conflict. By conflict I mean a
   struggle within the heart between the old nature and the new, the flesh
   and the spirit, which are to be found together in every believer. (Gal.
   v. 17.) A deep sense of that struggle, and a vast amount of mental
   discomfort from it, are no proof that a man is not sanctified. Nay,
   rather, I believe they are healthy symptoms of our condition, and prove
   that we are not dead, but alive, A true Christian is one who has not
   only peace of conscience, but war within. He may be known by his
   warfare as well as by his peace. In saying this, I do not forget that I
   am contradicting the views of some well-meaning Christians, who hold
   the doctrine called "sinless perfection." I cannot help that. I believe
   that what I say is confirmed by the language of St. Paul in the seventh
   chapter of Romans. That chapter I commend to the careful study of all
   my readers. I am quite satisfied that it does not describe the
   experience of an unconverted man, or of a young and unestablished
   Christian; but of an old experienced saint in close communion with God.
   None but such a man could say, "I delight in the law of God after the
   inward man." (Rom. vii. 22.) I believe, furthermore, that what I say is
   proved by the experience of all the most eminent servants of Christ
   that have ever lived. The full proof is to be seen in their journals,
   their autobiographies, and their lives.--Believing all this, I shall
   never hesitate to tell people that inward conflict is no proof that a
   man is not holy, and that they must not think they are not sanctified
   because they do not feel entirely free from inward struggle. Such
   freedom we shall doubtless have in heaven; but we shall never enjoy it
   in this world. The heart of the best Christian, even at his best, is a
   field occupied by two rival camps, and the "company of two armies."
   (Cant. vi. 13.) Let the words of the Thirteenth and Fifteenth Articles
   be well considered by all Churchmen: "The infection of nature doth
   remain in them that are regenerated." "Although baptized and born again
   in Christ, we offend in many things; and if we say that we have no sin,
   we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us." [6]

   (10) Sanctification, again, is a thing which cannot justify a man, and
   yet it pleases God. This may seem wonderful, and yet it is true. The
   holiest actions of the holiest saint that ever lived are all more or
   less full of defects and imperfections. They are either wrong in their
   motive or defective in their performance, and in themselves are nothing
   better than "splendid sins," deserving God's wrath and condemnation. To
   suppose that such actions can stand the severity of God's judgment,
   atone for sin, and merit heaven, is simply absurd. "By the deeds of the
   law shall no flesh be justified."--"We conclude that a man is justified
   by faith without the deeds of the law." (Rom. iii. 20-28.) The only
   righteousness in which we can appear before God is the righteousness of
   another--even the perfect righteousness of our Substitute and
   Representative, Jesus Christ the Lord. His work, and not our work, is
   our only title to heaven. This is a truth which we should be ready to
   die to maintain.--For all this, however, the Bible distinctly teaches
   that the holy actions of a sanctified man, although imperfect, are
   pleasing in the sight of God. "With such sacrifices God is well
   pleased." (Heb. xiii. 16.) "Obey your parents, for this is well
   pleasing to the Lord." (Col. iii. 20.) "We do those things that are
   pleasing in His sight." (1 John iii. 22.) Let this never be forgotten,
   for it is a very comfortable doctrine. Just as a parent is pleased with
   the efforts of his little child to please him, though it be only by
   picking a daisy or walking across a room, so is our Father in heaven
   pleased with the poor performances of His believing children. He looks
   at the motive, principle, and intention of their actions, and not
   merely at their quantity and quality. He regards them as members of His
   own dear Son, and for His sake, wherever there is a single eye, He is
   well-pleased. Those Churchmen who dispute this would do well to study
   the Twelfth Article of the Church of England.

   (11) Sanctification, again, is a thing which will be found absolutely
   necessary as a witness to our character in the great day of judgment.
   It will be utterly useless to plead that we believed in Christ, unless
   our faith has had some sanctifying effect, and been seen in our lives.
   Evidence, evidence, evidence, will be the one thing wanted when the
   great white throne is set, when the books are opened, when the graves
   give up their tenants, when the dead are arraigned before the bar of
   God. Without some evidence that our faith in Christ was real and
   genuine, we shall only rise again to be condemned. I can find no
   evidence that will be admitted In that day, except sanctification. The
   question will not be how we talked and what we professed, but how we
   lived and what we did. Let no man deceive himself on this point. If
   anything is certain about the future, it is certain that there will be
   a judgment; and if anything is certain about judgment, it is certain
   that men's "works" and "doings" will be considered and examined in it.
   (John v. 29; 2 Cor. v. 10; Rev. xx. 13.) He that supposes works are of
   no importance, because they cannot justify us, is a very ignorant
   Christian. Unless he opens his eyes, he will find to his cost that if
   he comes to the bar of God without some evidence of grace, he had
   better never have been born.

   (12) Sanctification, in the last place, is absolutely necessary in
   order to train and prepare us for heaven. Most men hope to go to heaven
   when they die; but few, it may be feared, take the trouble to consider
   whether they would enjoy heaven if they got there. Heaven is
   essentially a holy place; its inhabitants are all holy; its occupations
   are all holy. To be really happy in heaven, it is clear and plain that
   we must be somewhat trained and made ready for heaven while we are on
   earth. The notion of a purgatory after death, which shall turn sinners
   into saints, is a lying invention of man, and is nowhere taught in the
   Bible. We must be saints before we die, if we are to be saints
   afterwards in glory. The favourite idea of many, that dying men need
   nothing except absolution and forgiveness of sins to fit them for their
   great change, is a profound delusion. We need the work of the Holy
   Spirit as well as the work of Christ; we need renewal of the heart as
   well as the atoning blood; we need to be sanctified as well as to be
   justified. It is common to hear people saying on their death-beds, "I
   only want the Lord to forgive me my sins, and take me to rest." But
   those who say such things forget that the rest of heaven would be
   utterly useless if we had no heart to enjoy it! What could an
   unsanctified man do in heaven, if by any chance he got there? Let that
   question be fairly looked in the face, and fairly answered. No man can
   possibly be happy in a place where he is not in his element, and where
   all around him is not congenial to his tastes, habits, and character.
   When an eagle is happy in an iron cage, when a sheep is happy in the
   water, when an owl is happy in the blaze of noonday sun, when a fish is
   happy on the dry land--then, and not till then, will I admit that the
   unsanctified man could be happy in heaven. [7]

   I lay down these twelve propositions about sanctification with a firm
   persuasion that they are true, and I ask all who read these pages to
   ponder them well. Each of them would admit of being expanded and
   handled more fully, and all of them deserve private thought and
   consideration. Some of them may be disputed and contradicted; but I
   doubt whether any of them can be overthrown or proved untrue. I only
   ask for them a fair and impartial hearing. I believe in my conscience
   that they are likely to assist men in attaining clear views of
   sanctification.

   II. I now proceed to take up the second point which I proposed to
   consider. That point is the visible evidence of sanctification. In a
   word, what are the visible marks of a sanctified man? What may we
   expect to see in him?

   This is a very wide and difficult department of our subject. It is
   wide, because it necessitates the mention of many details which cannot
   be handled fully in the limits of a paper like this. It is difficult,
   because it cannot possibly be treated without giving offence. But at
   any risk truth ought to be spoken; and there is some kind of truth
   which especially requires to be spoken in the present day.

   (1) True sanctification then does not consist in talk about religion.
   This is a point which ought never to be forgotten. The vast increase of
   education and preaching in these latter days makes it absolutely
   necessary to raise a warning voice. People hear so much of Gospel truth
   that they contract an unholy familiarity with its words and phrases,
   and sometimes talk so fluently about its doctrines that you might think
   them true Christians. In fact it is sickening and disgusting to hear
   the cool and flippant language which many pour out about
   "conversion--the Saviour--the Gospel--finding peace--free grace," and
   the like, while they are notoriously serving sin or living for the
   world. Can we doubt that such talk is abominable in God's sight, and is
   little better than cursing, swearing, and taking God's name in vain?
   The tongue is not the only member that Christ bids us give to His
   service. God does not want His people to be mere empty tubs, sounding
   brass and tinkling cymbals. We must be sanctified, not only "in word
   and in tongue, but in deed and truth." (1 John iii. 18.)

   (2) True sanctification does not consist in temporary religious
   feelings. This again is a point about which a warning is greatly
   needed. Mission services and revival meetings are attracting great
   attention in every part of the land, and producing a great sensation.
   The Church of England seems to have taken a new lease of life, and
   exhibits a new activity; and we ought to thank God for it. But these
   things have their attendant dangers as well as their advantages.
   Wherever wheat is sown the devil is sure to sow tares. Many, it may be
   feared, appear moved and touched and roused under the preaching of the
   Gospel, while in reality their hearts are not changed at all. A kind of
   animal excitement from the contagion of seeing others weeping,
   rejoicing, or affected, is the true account of their case. Their wounds
   are only skin deep, and the peace they profess to feel is skin deep
   also. Like the stony-ground hearers, they "receive the Word with joy"
   (Matt. xiii. 20); but after a little they fall away, go back to the
   world, and are harder and worse than before. Like Jonah's gourd, they
   come up suddenly in a night and perish in a night. Let these things not
   be forgotten. Let us beware in this day of healing wounds slightly, and
   crying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace. Let us urge on every one
   who exhibits new interest in religion to be content with nothing short
   of the deep, solid, sanctifying work of the Holy Ghost. Reaction, after
   false religious excitement, is a most deadly disease of soul. When the
   devil is only temporarily cast out of a man in the heat of a revival,
   and by and by returns to his house, the last state becomes worse than
   the first. Better a thousand times begin more slowly, and then
   "continue in the word" steadfastly, than begin in a hurry, without
   counting the cost, and by and by look back, with Lot's wife, and return
   to the world. I declare I know no state of soul more dangerous than to
   imagine we are born again and sanctified by the Holy Ghost, because we
   have picked up a few religious feelings.

   (3) True sanctification does not consist in outward formalism and
   external devoutness. This is an enormous delusion, but unhappily a very
   common one. Thousands appear to imagine that true holiness is to be
   seen in an excessive quantity of bodily religion--in constant
   attendance on Church services, reception of the Lord's Supper, and
   observance of fasts and saints' days--in multiplied bowings and
   turnings and gestures and postures during public worship--in
   self-imposed austerities and petty self-denials--in wearing peculiar
   dresses, and the use of pictures and crosses. I freely admit that some
   people take up these things from conscientious motives, and actually
   believe that they help their souls. But I am afraid that in many cases
   this external religiousness is made a substitute for inward holiness;
   and I am quite certain that it falls utterly short of sanctification of
   heart. Above all, when I see that many followers of this outward,
   sensuous, and formal style of Christianity are absorbed in worldliness,
   and plunge headlong into its pomps and vanities, without shame, I feel
   that there is need of very plain speaking on the subject. There may be
   an immense amount of "bodily service," while there is not a jot of real
   sanctification.

   (4) Sanctification does not consist in retirement from our place in
   life, and the renunciation of our social duties. In every age k has
   been a snare with many to take up this line in the pursuit of holiness.
   Hundreds of hermits have buried themselves in some wilderness, and
   thousands of men and women have shut themselves up within the walls of
   monasteries and convents, under the vain idea that by so doing they
   would escape sin and become eminently holy. They have forgotten that no
   bolts and bars can keep out the devil, and that, wherever we go, we
   carry that root of all evil, our own hearts. To become a monk, or a
   nun, or to join a House of of Mercy, is not the high road to
   sanctification. True holiness does not make a Christian evade
   difficulties, but face and overcome them. Christ would have His people
   show that His grace is not a mere hot-house plant, which can only
   thrive under shelter, but a strong, hardy thing which can flourish in
   every relation of life. It is doing our duty in that state to which God
   has called us--like salt in the midst of corruption, and light in the
   midst of darkness--which is a primary element in sanctification. It is
   not the man who hides himself in a cave, but the man who glorifies God
   as master or servant, parent or child, in the family and in the street,
   in business and in trade, who is the Scriptural type of a sanctified
   man. Our Master Himself said in His last prayer, "I pray not that Thou
   shouldest take them out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep them
   from the evil." (John xvii. 15.)

   (5) Sanctification does not consist in the occasional performance of
   right actions. It is the habitual working of a new heavenly principle
   within, which runs through all a man's daily conduct, both in great
   things and in small. Its seat is in the heart, and like the heart in
   the body, it has a regular influence on every part of the character. It
   is not like a pump, which only sends forth water when worked upon from
   without, but like a perpetual fountain, from which a stream is ever
   flowing spontaneously and naturally. Even Herod, when he heard John the
   Baptist, "did many things," while his heart was utterly wrong in the
   sight of God. (Mark vi. 20.) Just so there are scores of people in the
   present day who seem to have spasmodical fits of "goodness," as it is
   called, and do many right things under the influence of sickness,
   affliction, death in the family, public calamities, or a sudden qualm
   of conscience. Yet all the time any intelligent observer can see
   plainly that they are not converted, and that they know nothing of
   "sanctification." A true saint, like Hezekiah, will be whole-hearted.
   He will "count God's commandments concerning all things to be right,
   and hate every false way." (2 Chron. xxxi. 21; Psalm cxix. 104.)

   (6) Genuine sanctification will show itself in habitual respect to
   God's law, and habitual effort to live in obedience to it as the rule
   of life. There is no greater mistake than to suppose that a Christian
   has nothing to do with the law and the Ten Commandments, because he
   cannot be justified by keeping them. The same Holy Ghost who convinces
   the believer of sin by the law, and leads him to Christ for
   justification, will always lead him to a spiritual use of the law, as a
   friendly guide, in the pursuit of sanctification. Our Lord Jesus Christ
   never made light of the Ten Commandments; on the contrary, in His first
   public discourse, the Sermon on the Mount, He expounded them, and
   showed the searching nature of their requirements. St. Paul never made
   light of the law: on the contrary, he says, "The law is good, if a man
   use it lawfully."--"I delight in the law of God after the inward man",
   (1 Tim. i. 8; Rom. vii. 22.) He that pretends to be a saint, while he
   sneers at the Ten Commandments, and thinks nothing of lying, hypocrisy,
   swindling, ill-temper, slander, drunkenness, and breach of the seventh
   commandment, is under a fearful delusion. He will find it hard to prove
   that he is a "saint" in the last day!

   (7) Genuine sanctification will show itself in an habitual endeavour to
   do Christ's will, and to live by His practical precepts. These precepts
   are to be found scattered everywhere throughout the four Gospels, and
   especially in the Sermon on the Mount. He that supposes they were
   spoken without the intention of promoting holiness, and that a
   Christian need not attend to them in his daily life, is really little
   better than a lunatic, and at any rate is a grossly ignorant person. To
   hear some men talk, and read some men's writings, one might imagine
   that our blessed Lord, when He was on earth, never taught anything but
   doctrine, and left practical duties to be taught by others! The
   slightest knowledge of the four Gospels ought to tell us that this is a
   complete mistake. What His disciples ought to be and to do is
   continually brought forward in our Lord's teaching. A truly sanctified
   man will never forget this. He serves a Master who said, "Ye are my
   friends if ye do whatsoever I command you." (John xv. 14.)

   (8) Genuine sanctification will show itself in an habitual desire to
   live up to the standard which St. Paul sets before the Churches in his
   writings. That standard is to be found in the closing chapters of
   nearly all his Epistles. The common idea of many persons that St.
   Paul's writings are full of nothing but doctrinal statements and
   controversial subjects--justification, election, predestination,
   prophecy, and the like--is an entire delusion, and a melancholy proof
   of the ignorance of Scripture which prevails in these latter days. I
   defy anyone to read St. Paul's writings carefully without finding in
   them a large quantity of plain, practical directions about the
   Christian's duty in every relation of life, and about our daily habits,
   temper, and behaviour to one another. These directions were written
   down by inspiration of God for the perpetual guidance of professing
   Christians. He who does not attend to them may possibly pass muster as
   a member of a church or a chapel, but he certainly is not what the
   Bible calls a "sanctified" man.

   (9) Genuine sanctification will show itself in habitual attention to
   the active graces which our Lord so beautifully exemplified, and
   especially to the grace of charity. "A new commandment I give unto you,
   that ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one
   another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye
   have love one to another." (John xiii. 34, 35.) A sanctified man will
   try to do good in the world, and to lessen the sorrow and increase the
   happiness of all around him. He will aim to be like his Master, full of
   kindness and love to every one; and this not in word only, by calling
   people "dear," but by deeds and actions and self-denying work,
   according as he has opportunity. The selfish Christian professor, who
   wraps himself up in his own conceit of superior knowledge, and seems to
   care nothing whether others sink or swim, go to heaven or hell, so long
   as he walks to church or chapel in his Sunday best, and is called a
   "sound member"--such a man knows nothing of sanctification. He may
   think himself a saint on earth, but he will not be a saint in heaven.
   Christ will never be found the Saviour of those who know nothing of
   following His example. Saving faith and real converting grace will
   always produce some conformity to the image of Jesus. [8] (Coloss. iii.
   10.)

   (10) Genuine sanctification, in the last place, will show itself in
   habitual attention to the passive graces of Christianity. When I speak
   of passive graces, I mean those graces which are especially shown in
   submission to the will of God, and in bearing and for bearing towards
   one another. Few people, perhaps, unless they have examined the point,
   have an idea how much is said about these graces in the New Testament,
   and how important a place they seem to fill. This is the special point
   which St. Peter dwells upon in commending our Lord Jesus Christ's
   example to our notice: "Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
   example, that we should follow His steps: Who did no sin, neither was
   guile found in His mouth: Who, when He was reviled, reviled not again;
   when He suffered, He threatened not; but committed Himself to Him that
   judgeth righteously." (1 Peter ii. 21-23.)--This is the one piece of
   profession which the Lord's prayer requires us to make: "Forgive us our
   trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us"; and the one
   point that is commented upon at the end of the prayer.--This is the
   point which occupies one-third of the list of the fruits of the Spirit,
   supplied by St. Paul. Nine are named, and three of these,
   "long-suffering, gentleness, and meekness," are unquestionably passive
   graces. (Gal. v. 22, 23.) I must plainly say that I do not think this
   subject is sufficiently considered by Christians. The passive graces
   are no doubt harder to attain than the active ones, but they are
   precisely the graces which have the greatest influence on the world. Of
   one thing I feel very sure--it is nonsense to pretend to sanctification
   unless we follow after the meekness, gentleness, long-suffering, and
   forgiveness of which the Bible makes so much. People who are habitually
   giving way to peevish and cross tempers in daily life, and are
   constantly sharp with their tongues, and disagreeable to all around
   them--spiteful people, vindictive people, revengeful people, malicious
   people--of whom, alas, the world is only too full!--all such know
   little, as they should know, about sanctification.

   Such are the visible marks of a sanctified man. I do not say that they
   are all to be seen equally in all God's people. I freely admit that in
   the best they are not fully and perfectly exhibited. But I do say
   confidently, that the things of which i have been speaking are the
   Scriptural marks of sanctification, and that they who know nothing of
   them may well doubt whether they have any grace at all. Whatever others
   may please to say, I will never shrink from saying that genuine
   sanctification is a thing that can be seen, and that the marks I have
   endeavoured to sketch out are more or less the marks of a sanctified
   man.

   III. I now propose to consider, in the last place, the distinction
   between justification and sanctification. Wherein do they agree, and
   wherein do they differ? This branch of our subject is one of great
   importance, though I fear it will not seem so to all my readers. I
   shall handle it briefly, but I dare not pass it over altogether. Too
   many are apt to look at nothing but the surface of things in religion,
   and regard nice distinctions in theology as questions of "words and
   names," which are of little real value. But I warn all who are in
   earnest about their souls, that the discomfort which arises from not
   "distinguishing things that differ" in Christian doctrine is very great
   indeed; and I especially advise them, if they love peace, to seek clear
   views about the matter before us. Justification and sanctification are
   two distinct things we must always remember. Yet there are points in
   which they agree and points in which they differ. Let us try to find
   out what they are.

   In what, then, are justification and sanctification alike?

   (a) Both proceed originally from the free grace of God. It is of His
   gift alone that believers are justified or sanctified at all.

   (b) Both are part of that great work of salvation which Christ, in the
   eternal covenant, has undertaken on behalf of His people. Christ is the
   fountain of life, from which pardon and holiness both flow. The root of
   each is Christ.

   (c) Both are to be found in the same persons. Those who are justified
   are always sanctified, and those who are sanctified are always
   justified. God has joined them together, and they cannot be put
   asunder.

   (d) Both begin at the same time. The moment a person begins to be a
   justified person, he also begins to be a sanctified person. He may not
   feel it, but it is a fact.

   (e) Both are alike necessary to salvation. No one ever reached heaven
   without a renewed heart as well as forgiveness, without the Spirit's
   grace as well as the blood of Christ, without a meetness for eternal
   glory as well as a title. The one is just as necessary as the other.

   Such are the points on which justification and sanctification agree.
   Let us now reverse the picture, and see wherein they differ.

   (a) Justification is the reckoning and counting a man to be righteous
   for the sake of another, even Jesus Christ the Lord. Sanctification is
   the actual making a man inwardly righteous, though it may be in a very
   feeble degree.

   (b) The righteousness we have by our justification is not our own, but
   the everlasting perfect righteousness of our great Mediator Christ,
   imputed to us, and made our own by faith. The righteousness we have by
   sanctification is our own righteousness, imparted, inherent, and
   wrought in us by the Holy Spirit, but mingled with much infirmity and
   imperfection.

   (c) In justification our own works have no place at all, and simple
   faith in Christ is the one thing needful. In sanctification our own
   works are of vast importance and God bids us fight, and watch, and
   pray, and strive, and take pains, and labour.

   (d) Justification is a finished and complete work, and a man is
   perfectly justified the moment he believes. Sanctification is an
   imperfect work, comparatively, and will never be perfected until we
   reach heaven.

   (e) Justification admits of no growth or increase: a man is as much
   justified the hour he first comes to Christ by faith as he will be to
   all eternity. Sanctification is eminently a progressive work, and
   admits of continual growth and enlargement so long as a man lives.

   (f) Justification has special reference to our persons, our standing in
   God's sight, and our deliverance from guilt. Sanctification has special
   reference to our natures, and the moral renewal of our hearts.

   (g) Justification gives us our title to heaven, and boldness to enter
   in. Sanctification gives us our meetness for heaven, and prepares us to
   enjoy it when we dwell there.

   (h) Justification is the act of God about us, and is not easily
   discerned by others. Sanctification is the work of God within us, and
   cannot be hid in its outward manifestation from the eyes of men.

   I commend these distinctions to the attention of all my readers, and I
   ask them to ponder them well. I am persuaded that one great cause of
   the darkness and uncomfortable feelings of many well-meaning people in
   the matter of religion, is their habit of confounding, and not
   distinguishing, justification and sanctification. It can never be too
   strongly impressed on our minds that they are two separate things. No
   doubt they cannot be divided, and everyone that is a partaker of either
   is a partaker of both. But never, never ought they to be confounded,
   and never ought the distinction between them to be forgotten.

   It only remains for me now to bring this subject to a conclusion by a
   few plain words of application. The nature and visible marks of
   sanctification have been brought before us. What practical reflections
   ought the whole matter to raise in our minds?

   (1) For one thing, let us all awake to a sense of the perilous state of
   many professing Christians. "Without holiness no man shall see the
   Lord"; without sanctification there is no salvation. (Heb. xii. 14.)
   Then what an enormous amount of so-called religion there is which is
   perfectly useless! What an immense proportion of church-goers and
   chapel-goers are in the broad road that leadeth to destruction! The
   thought is awful, crushing, and overwhelming. Oh, that preachers and
   teachers would open their eyes and realize the condition of souls
   around them! Oh, that men could be persuaded to "flee from the wrath to
   come "! If unsanctified souls can be saved and go to heaven, the Bible
   is not true. Yet the Bible is true and cannot lie! What must the end
   be!

   (2) For another thing, let us make sure work of our own condition, and
   never rest till we feel and know that we are "sanctified" ourselves.
   What are our tastes, and choices, and likings, and inclinations? This
   is the great testing question. It matters little what we wish, and what
   we hope, and what we desire to be before we die. Where are we now? What
   are we doing? Are we sanctified or not? If not, the fault is all our
   own.

   (3) For another thing, if we would be sanctified, our course is clear
   and plain--we must begin with Christ. We must go to Him as sinners,
   with no plea but that of utter need, and cast our souls on Him by
   faith, for peace and reconciliation with God. We must place ourselves
   in His hands, as in the hands of a good physician, and cry to Him for
   mercy and grace. We must wait for nothing to bring with us as a
   recommendation. The very first step towards sanctification, no less
   than justification, is to come with faith to Christ. We must first live
   and then work.

   (4) For another thing, if we would grow in holiness and become more
   sanctified, we must continually go on as we began, and be ever making
   fresh applications to Christ. He is the Head from which every member
   must be supplied. (Ephes. iv. 16.) To live the life of daily faith in
   the Son of God, and to be daily drawing out of His fulness the promised
   grace and strength which He has laid up for His people--this is the
   grand secret of progressive sanctification. Believers who seem at a
   standstill are generally neglecting close communion with Jesus, and so
   grieving the Spirit. He that prayed, "Sanctify them," the last night
   before His crucifixion, is infinitely willing to help everyone who by
   faith applies to Him for help, and desires to be made more holy.

   (5) For another thing, let us not expect too much from our own hearts
   here below. At our best we shall find in ourselves daily cause for
   humiliation, and discover that we are needy debtors to mercy and grace
   every hour. The more light we have, the more we shall see our own
   imperfection. Sinners we were when we began, sinners we shall find
   ourselves as we go on; renewed, pardoned, justified--yet sinners to the
   very last. Our absolute perfection is yet to come, and the expectation
   of it is one reason why we should long for heaven.

   (6) Finally, let us never be ashamed of making much of sanctification,
   and contending for a high standard of holiness. While some are
   satisfied with a miserably low degree of attainment, and others are not
   ashamed to live on without any holiness at all--content with a mere
   round of church-going and chapel-going, but never getting on, like a
   horse in a mill--let us stand fast in the old paths, follow after
   eminent holiness ourselves, and recommend it boldly to others. This is
   the only way to be really happy.

   Let us feel convinced, whatever others may say, that holiness is
   happiness, and that the man who gets through life most comfortably is
   the sanctified man. No doubt there are some true Christians who from
   ill-health, or family trials, or other secret causes, enjoy little
   sensible comfort, and go mourning all their days on the way to heaven.
   But these are exceptional cases. As a general rule, in the long run of
   life, it will be found true that "sanctified" people are the happiest
   people on earth. They have solid comforts which the world can neither
   give nor take away. "The ways of wisdom are ways of
   pleasantness."--"Great peace have they that love Thy law."--It was said
   by One who cannot lie, "My yoke is easy, and my burden is light."--But
   it is also written, "There is no peace unto the wicked." (Prov iii. 17;
   Ps. cxix. 165; Matt. xi. 30; Is. xlviii. 22.)
     __________________________________________________________________

  P. S.

   THE subject of sanctification is of such deep importance, and the
   mistakes made about it so many and great, that I make no apology for
   strongly recommending "Owen on the Holy Spirit" to all who want to
   study more thoroughly the whole doctrine of sanctification. No single
   paper like this can embrace it all.

   I am quite aware that Owen's writings are not fashionable in the
   present day, and that many think fit to neglect and sneer at him as a
   Puritan! Yet the great divine who in Commonwealth times was Dean of
   Christ Church, Oxford, does not deserve to be treated in this way. He
   had more learning and sound knowledge of Scripture in his little finger
   than many who depreciate him have in their whole bodies. I assert
   unhesitatingly that the man who wants to study experimental theology
   will find no books equal to those of Owen and some of his
   contemporaries, for complete, Scriptural, and exhaustive treatment of
   the subjects they handle.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5] There is mention in the Scripture of a twofold sanctification, and
   consequently in a twofold holiness. The first is common unto persons
   and things, consisting of the peculiar dedication, consecration, or
   separation of them unto the service of God, by His own appointment,
   whereby they become holy. Thus the priests and Levites of old, the ark,
   the altar, the tabernacle, and the temple, were sanctified and made
   holy; and, indeed, in all holiness whatever, there is a peculiar
   dedication and separation unto God. But in the sense mentioned, this
   was solitary and alone. No more belonged unto it but this sacred
   separation, nor was there any other effect of this sanctification. But,
   secondly, there is another kind of sanctification and holiness, wherein
   this separation to God is not the first thing done or intended, but a
   consequent and effect thereof. This is real and internal, by the
   communicating of a principle of holiness unto our natures, attended
   with its exercise in acts and duties of holy obedience unto God. This
   is that which we inquire after."--John Owen on the Holy Spirit. Vol.
   iii, p. 370, Works, Goold's edition.

   [6] "The devil's war is better than the devil's peace. Suspect dumb
   holiness. When the dog is kept out of doors he howls to be let in
   again."--"Contraries meeting, such as fire and water, conflict one with
   another.--When Satan findeth a sanctified heart, he tempteth with much
   importunity. Where there is much of God and of Christ, there are strong
   injections and firebrands cast in at the windows, so that some of much
   faith have been tempted to doubt."--Rutherford's Trial of Faith, p.
   403.

   [7] "There is no imagination wherewith man is besotted, more foolish,
   none so pernicious, as this,--that persons not purified, not
   sanctified, not made holy in their life, should afterwards be taken
   into that state of blessedness which consists in the enjoyment of God.
   Neither can such persons enjoy God, nor would God be a reward to
   them.--Holiness indeed is perfected in heaven: but the beginning of it
   is invariably confined to this world."--Owen on Holy Spirit, p. 575.
   Goold's edition.

   [8] "Christ in the Gospel is proposed to us as our pattern and example
   of holiness; and as it is a cursed imagination that this was the whole
   end of his life and death: namely, to exemplify and confirm the
   doctrine of holiness which He taught--so to neglect His being our
   example, in considering Him by faith to that end, and labouring after
   conformity to Him, is evil and pernicious. Wherefore let us be much in
   the contemplation of what He was, and what He did, and how in all
   duties and trials He carried Himself, until an image or idea of His
   perfect holiness is implanted in our minds, and we are made like unto
   Him thereby."--Owen on the Holy Ghost, p. 513. Goold's edition.
     __________________________________________________________________

III.
HOLINESS

   "Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord."--Heb. xii. 14.

   The text which heads this page opens up a subject of deep importance.
   That subject is practical holiness. It suggests a question which
   demands the attention of all professing Christians--Are we holy? Shall
   we see the Lord?

   That question can never be out of season. The wise man tells us, "There
   is a time to weep, and a time to laugh--a time to keep silence, and a
   time to speak" (Eccles. iii. 4, 7); but there is no time, no, not a
   day, in which a man ought not to be holy. Are we?

   That question concerns all ranks and conditions of men. Some are rich
   and some are poor--some learned and some unlearned--some masters, and
   some servants; but there is no rank or condition in life in which a man
   ought not to be holy. Are we?

   I ask to be heard to-day about this question. How stands the account
   between our souls and God? In this hurrying, bustling world, let us
   stand still for a few minutes and consider the matter of holiness. I
   believe I might have chosen a subject more popular and pleasant. I am
   sure I might have found one more easy to handle. But I feel deeply I
   could not have chosen one more seasonable and more profitable to our
   souls. It is a solemn thing to hear the Word of God saying, "Without
   holiness no man shall see the Lord." (Heb. xii. 14.)

   I shall endeavour, by God's help, to examine what true holiness is, and
   the reason why it is so needful. In conclusion, I shall try to point
   out the only way in which holiness can be attained. I have already, in
   the second paper in this volume, approached this subject from a
   doctrinal side. Let me now try to present it to my readers in a more
   plain and practical point of view.

   I. First, then, let me try to show what true practical holiness
   is--what sort of persons are those whom God calls holy.

   A man may go great lengths, and yet never reach true holiness. It is
   not knowledge--Balaam had that: nor great profession--Judas Iscariot
   had that: nor doing many things--Herod had that: nor zeal for certain
   matters in religion--Jehu had that: nor morality and outward
   respectability of conduct--the young ruler had that: nor taking
   pleasure in hearing preachers--the Jews in Ezekiel's time had that: nor
   keeping company with godly people--Joab and Gehazi and Demas had that.
   Yet none of these was holy! These things alone are not holiness. A man
   may have any one of them, and yet never see the Lord.

   What then is true practical holiness? It is a hard question to answer.
   I do not mean that there is any want of Scriptural matter on the
   subject. But I fear lest I should give a defective view of holiness,
   and not say all that ought to be said; or lest I should say things
   about it that ought not to be said, and so do harm. Let me, however,
   try to draw a picture of holiness, that we may see it clearly before
   the eyes of our minds. Only let it never be forgotten, when I have said
   all, that my account is but a poor imperfect outline at the best.

   (a) Holiness is the habit of being of one mind with God, according as
   we find His mind described in Scripture. It is the habit of agreeing in
   God's judgment--hating what He hates--loving what He loves--and
   measuring everything in this world by the standard of His Word. He who
   most entirely agrees with God, he is the most holy man.

   (b) A holy man will endeavour to shun every known sin, and to keep
   every known commandment. He will have a decided bent of mind toward
   God, a hearty desire to do His will--a greater fear of displeasing Him
   than of displeasing the world, and a love to all His ways. He will feel
   what Paul felt when he said,"I delight in the law of God after the
   inward man" (Rom. vii. 22), and what David felt when he said, "I esteem
   all Thy precepts concerning all things to be right, and I hate every
   false way." (Psalm cxix. 128.)

   (c) A holy man will strive to be like our Lord Jesus Christ. He will
   not only live the life of faith in Him, and draw from Him all his daily
   peace and strength, but he will also labour to have the mind that was
   in Him, and to be "conformed to His image." (Rom. viii. 29.) It will be
   his aim to bear with and forgive others, even as Christ forgave us--to
   be unselfish, even as Christ pleased not Himself--to walk in love, even
   as Christ loved us--to be lowly-minded and humble, even as Christ made
   Himself of no reputation and humbled Himself. He will remember that
   Christ was a faithful witness for the truth--that He came not to do His
   own will--that it was His meat and drink to do His Father's will--that
   He would continually deny Himself in order to minister to others--that
   He was meek and patient under undeserved insults--that He thought more
   of godly poor men than of kings--that He was full of love and
   compassion to sinners--that He was bold and uncompromising in
   denouncing sin--that He sought not the praise of men, when He might
   have had it--that He went about doing good--that He was separate from
   worldly people--that He continued instant in prayer--that He would not
   let even His nearest relations stand in His way when God's work was to
   be done. These things a holy man will try to remember. By them he will
   endeavour to shape his course in life. He will lay to heart the saying
   of John, "He that saith he abideth in Christ ought himself also so to
   walk, even as He walked" (1 John ii. 6); and the saying of Peter, that
   "Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example that ye should follow
   His steps." (1 Peter ii. 21.) Happy is he who has learned to make
   Christ his "all," both for salvation and example! Much time would be
   saved, and much sin prevented, if men would oftener ask themselves the
   question, "What would Christ have said and done, if He were in my
   place?"

   (d) A holy man will follow after meekness, longsuffering, gentleness,
   patience, kind tempers, government of his tongue. He will bear much,
   forbear much, overlook much, and be slow to talk of standing on his
   rights. We see a bright example of this in the behaviour of David when
   Shimei cursed him--and of Moses when Aaron and Miriam spake against
   him. (2 Sam. xvi. 10; Num. xii. 3.)

   (e) A holy man will follow after temperance and self-denial. He will
   labour to mortify the desires of his body--to crucify his flesh with
   his affections and lusts--to curb his passions--to restrain his carnal
   inclinations, lest at any time they break loose. Oh, what a word is
   that of the Lord Jesus to the Apostles, "Take heed to yourselves, lest
   at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness,
   and cares of this life" (Luke xxi. 34); and that of the Apostle Paul,
   "I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any
   means when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway."
   (1 Cor. ix. 27.)

   (f) A holy man will follow after charity and brotherly kindness. He
   will endeavour to observe the golden rule of doing as he would have men
   do to him, and speaking as he would have men speak to him. He will be
   full of affection towards his brethren--towards their bodies, their
   property, their characters, their feelings, their souls. "He that
   loveth another," says Paul, "hath fulfilled the law." (Rom. xiii. 8.)
   He will abhor all lying, slandering, backbiting, cheating, dishonesty,
   and unfair dealing, even in the least things. The shekel and cubit of
   the sanctuary were larger than those in common use. He will strive to
   adorn his religion by all his outward demeanour, and to make it lovely
   and beautiful in the eyes of all around him. Alas, what condemning
   words are the 13th chapter of 1 Corinthians, and the Sermon on the
   Mount, when laid alongside the conduct of many professing Christians!

   (g) A holy man will follow after a spirit of mercy and benevolence
   towards others. He will not stand all the day idle. He will not be
   content with doing no harm--he will try to do good. He will strive to
   be useful in his day and generation, and to lessen the spiritual wants
   and misery around him, as far as he can. Such was Dorcas, "full of good
   works and almsdeeds, which she did,"--not merely purposed and talked
   about, but did. Such an one was Paul: "I will very gladly spend and be
   spent for you," he says, "though the more abundantly I love you the
   less I be loved." (Acts ix. 36; 2 Cor. xii. 15.)

   (h) A holy man will follow after purity of heart. He will dread all
   filthiness and uncleanness of spirit, and seek to avoid all things that
   might draw him into it. He knows his own heart is like tinder, and will
   diligently keep clear of the sparks of temptation. Who shall dare to
   talk of strength when David can fall? There is many a hint to be
   gleaned from the ceremonial law. Under it the man who only touched a
   bone, or a dead body, or a grave, or a diseased person, became at once
   unclean in the sight of God. And these things were emblems and figures.
   Few Christians are ever too watchful and too particular about this
   point.

   (i) A holy man will follow after the fear of God. I do not mean the
   fear of a slave, who only works because he is afraid of punishment, and
   would be idle if he did not dread discovery. I mean rather the fear of
   a child, who wishes to live and move as if he was always before his
   father s face, because he loves him. What a noble example Nehemiah
   gives us of this! When he became Governor at Jerusalem he might have
   been chargeable to the Jews and required of them money for his support.
   The former Governors had done so. There was none to blame him if he
   did. But he says, "So did not I, because of the fear of God." (Nehem.
   v. 15.)

   (j) A holy man will follow after humility. He will desire, in lowliness
   of mind, to esteem all others better than himself. He will see more
   evil in his own heart than in any other in the world. He will
   understand something of Abraham's feeling, when he says, "I am dust and
   ashes;"--and Jacob's, when he says, "I am less than the least of all
   Thy mercies;"--and Job's, when he says, "I am vile;"--and Paul's, when
   he says, "I am chief of sinners." Holy Bradford, that faithful martyr
   of Christ, would sometimes finish his letters with these words, "A most
   miserable sinner, John Bradford." Good old Mr. Grimshaw's last words,
   when he lay on his death-bed, were these, "Here goes an unprofitable
   servant."

   (k) A holy man will follow after faithfulness in all the duties and
   relations in life. He will try, not merely to fill his place as well as
   others who take no thought for their souls, but even better, because he
   has higher motives, and more help than they. Those words of Paul should
   never be forgotten, "Whatever ye do, do it heartily, as unto the
   Lord,"--"Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, serving the
   Lord." (Col. iii. 23; Rom. xii. 11.) Holy persons should aim at doing
   everything well, and should be ashamed of allowing themselves to do
   anything ill if they can help it. Like Daniel, they should seek to give
   no "occasion" against themselves, except "concerning the law of their
   God." (Dan. vi. 5.) They should strive to be good husbands and good
   wives, good parents and good children, good masters and good servants,
   good neighbours, good friends, good subjects, good in private and good
   in public, good in the place of business and good by their firesides.
   Holiness is worth little indeed, if it does not bear this kind of
   fruit. The Lord Jesus puts a searching question to His people, when He
   says, "What do ye more than others?" (Matt. v. 47.)

   (l) Last, but not least, a holy man will follow after spiritual
   mindedness. He will endeavour to set his affections entirely on things
   above, and to hold things on earth with a very loose hand. He will not
   neglect the business of the life that now is; but the first place in
   his mind and thoughts will be given to the life to come. He will aim to
   live like one whose treasure is in heaven, and to pass through this
   world like a stranger and pilgrim travelling to his home. To commune
   with God in prayer, in the Bible, and in the assembly of His
   people--these things will be the holy man's chiefest enjoyments. He
   will value every thing and place and company, just in proportion as it
   draws him nearer to God. He will enter into something of David's
   feeling, when he says, "My soul followeth hard after Thee." "Thou art
   my portion." (Psalm lxiii. 8; cxix. 57.)

   Such is the outline of holiness which I venture to sketch out. Such is
   the character which those who are called "holy" follow after. Such are
   the main features of a holy man.

   But here let me say, I trust no man will misunderstand me. I am not
   without fear that my meaning will be mistaken, and the description I
   have given of holiness will discourage some tender conscience. I would
   not willingly make one righteous heart sad, or throw a stumbling-block
   in any believer's way.

   I do not say for a moment that holiness shuts out the presence of
   indwelling sin. No: far from it. It is the greatest misery of a holy
   man that he carries about with him a "body of death;"--that often when
   he would do good "evil is present with him"; that the old man is
   clogging all his movements, and, as it were, trying to draw him back at
   every step he takes. (Rom. vii. 21.) But it is the excellence of a holy
   man that he is not at peace with indwelling sin, as others are. He
   hates it, mourns over it, and longs to be free from its company. The
   work of sanctification within him is like the wall of Jerusalem--the
   building goes forward "even in troublous times." (Dan. ix. 25.)

   Neither do I say that holiness comes to ripeness and perfection all at
   once, or that these graces I have touched on must be found in full
   bloom and vigour before you can call a man holy. No: far from it.
   Sanctification is always a progressive work. Some men's graces are in
   the blade, some in the ear, and some are like full corn in the ear. All
   must have a beginning. We must never despise "the day of small things."
   And sanctification in the very best is an imperfect work. The history
   of the brightest saints that ever lived will contain many a "but," and
   "howbeit," and "notwithstanding," before you reach the end. The gold
   will never be without some dross--the light will never shine without
   some clouds, until we reach the heavenly Jerusalem. The sun himself has
   spots upon his face. The holiest men have many a blemish and defect
   when weighed in the balance of the sanctuary. Their life is a continual
   warfare with sin, the world, and the devil; and sometimes you will see
   them not overcoming, but overcome. The flesh is ever lusting against
   the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and "in many things they
   offend all." (Gal. v. 17; James iii. 2.)

   But still, for all this, I am sure that to have such a character as I
   have faintly drawn, is the heart's desire and prayer of all true
   Christians. They press towards it, if they do not reach it. They may
   not attain to it, but they always aim at it. It is what they strive and
   labour to be, if it is not what they are.

   And this I do boldly and confidently say, that true holiness is a great
   reality. It is something in a man that can be seen, and known, and
   marked, and felt by all around him. It is light: if it exists, it will
   show itself. It is salt: if it exists, its savour will be perceived. It
   is a precious ointment: if it exists, its presence cannot be hid.

   I am sure we should all be ready to make allowance for much
   backsliding, for much occasional deadness in professing Christians. I
   know a road may lead from one point to another, and yet have many a
   winding and turn; and a man may be truly holy, and yet be drawn aside
   by many an infirmity. Gold is not the less gold because mingled with
   alloy, nor light the less light because faint and dim, nor grace the
   less grace because young and weak. But after every allowance, I cannot
   see how any man deserves to be called "holy," who wilfully allows
   himself in sins, and is not humbled and ashamed because of them. I dare
   not call anyone "holy" who makes a habit of wilfully neglecting known
   duties, and wilfully doing what he knows God has commanded him not to
   do. Well says Owen, "I do not understand how a man can be a true
   believer unto whom sin is not the greatest burden, sorrow, and
   trouble."

   Such are the leading characteristics of practical holiness. Let us
   examine ourselves and see whether we are acquainted with it. Let us
   prove our own selves.

   II. Let me try, in the next place, to show some reasons why practical
   holiness is so important.

   Can holiness save us? Can holiness put away sin--cover iniquities--make
   satisfaction for transgressions--pay our debt to God? No: not a whit.
   God forbid that I should ever say so. Holiness can do none of these
   things. The brightest saints are all "unprofitable servants." Our
   purest works are no better than filthy rags, when tried by the light of
   God's holy law. The white robe which Jesus offers, and faith puts on,
   must be our only righteousness--the name of Christ our only
   confidence--the Lamb's book of life our only title to heaven. With all
   our holiness we are no better than sinners. Our best things are stained
   and tainted with imperfection. They are all more or less incomplete,
   wrong in the motive or defective in the performance. By the deeds of
   the law shall no child of Adam ever be justified. "By grace are ye
   saved through faith, and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God:
   not of works, lest any man should boast." (Ephes. ii. 8, 9.)

   Why then is holiness so important? Why does the Apostle say, "Without
   it no man shall see the Lord"? Let me set out in order a few reasons.

   (a) For one thing, we must be holy, because the voice of God in
   Scripture plainly commands it. The Lord Jesus says to His people,
   "Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the
   scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of
   heaven." (Matt. v. 20.) "Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in
   heaven is perfect." (Matt. v. 48.) Paul tells the Thessalonians, "This
   is the will of God, even your sanctification." (1 Thess. iv. 3.) And
   Peter says, "As He which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
   manner of conversation;" because it is written, "Be ye holy, for I am
   holy." (1 Peter i. 15, 16.) "In this," says Leighton, "law and Gospel
   agree."

   (b) We must be holy, because this is one grand end and purpose for
   which Christ came into the world. Paul writes to the Corinthians, "He
   died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto
   themselves, but unto Him which died for them and rose again." (2 Cor.
   v. 15.) And to the Ephesians, "Christ loved the Church, and gave
   Himself for it, that He might sanctify and cleanse it." (Ephes. v. 25,
   26.) And to Titus, "He gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us
   from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a peculiar people, zealous
   of good works." (Titus ii. 14.) In short, to talk of men being saved
   from the guilt of sin, without being at the same time saved from its
   dominion in their hearts, is to contradict the witness of all
   Scripture. Are believers said to be elect!--it is "through
   sanctification of the Spirit." Are they predestinated?--it is "to be
   conformed to the image of God's Son." Are they chosen?--it is "that
   they may be holy." Are they called?--is it "with a holy calling." Are
   they afflicted?--it is that they may be "partakers of holiness." Jesus
   is a complete Saviour. He does not merely take away the guilt of a
   believer's sin, He does more--He breaks its power, (1 Peter i. 2; Rom.
   viii. 29; Eph. i. 4; Heb. xii. 10.)

   (c) We must be holy, because this is the only sound evidence that we
   have a saving faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. The Twelfth Article of
   our Church says truly, that "Although good works cannot put away our
   sins, and endure the severity of God's judgment, yet are they pleasing
   and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a
   true and lively faith; insomuch that by them a lively faith may be as
   evidently known as a tree discerned by its fruits." James warns us
   there is such a thing as a dead faith--a faith which goes no further
   than the profession of the lips, and has no influence on a man's
   character. (James ii. 17.) True saving faith is a very different kind
   of thing. True faith will always show itself by its fruits--it will
   sanctify, it will work by love, it will overcome the world, it will
   purify the heart. I know that people are fond of talking about
   death-bed evidences. They will rest on words spoken in the hours of
   fear, and pain, and weakness, as if they might take comfort in them
   about the friends they lose. But I am afraid in ninety-nine cases out
   of a hundred such evidences are not to be depended on. I suspect that,
   with rare exceptions, men die just as they have lived. The only safe
   evidence that we are one with Christ, and Christ in us, is holy life.
   They that live unto the Lord are generally the only people who die in
   the Lord. If we would die the death of the righteous, let us not rest
   in slothful desires only; let us seek to live His life. It is a true
   saying of Traill's, "That man's state is naught, and his faith unsound,
   that find not his hopes of glory purifying to his heart and life."

   (d) We must be holy, because this is the only proof that we love the
   Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. This is a point on which He has spoken
   most plainly, in the fourteenth and fifteenth chapters of John. "If ye
   love Me, keep my commandments."--"He that hath my commandments and
   keepeth them, he it is that loveth Me."--"If a man love Me he will keep
   my words."--"Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you."
   (John xiv. 15, 21, 23; xv. 14.)--Plainer words than these it would be
   difficult to find, and woe to those who neglect them! Surely that man
   must be in an unhealthy state of soul who can think of all that Jesus
   suffered, and yet cling to those sins for which that suffering was
   undergone It was sin that wove the crown of thorns--it was sin that
   pierced our Lord's hands, and feet, and side--it was sin that brought
   Him to Gethsemane and Calvary, to the cross and to the grave. Cold must
   our hearts be if we do not hate sin and labour to get rid of it, though
   we may have to cut off the right hand and pluck out the right eye in
   doing it.

   (e) We must be holy, because this is the only sound evidence that we
   are true children of God. Children in this world are generally like
   their parents. Some, doubtless, are more so, and some less--but it is
   seldom indeed that you cannot trace a kind of family likeness. And it
   is much the same with the children of God. The Lord Jesus says, "If ye
   were Abraham's children ye would do the works of Abraham."--"If God
   were your Father ye would love Me." (John viii. 39, 42.) If men have no
   likeness to the Father in heaven, it is vain to talk of their being His
   "sons." If we know nothing of holiness we may flatter ourselves as we
   please, but we have not got the Holy Spirit dwelling in us: we are
   dead, and must be brought to life again--we are lost, and must be
   found. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they," and they only,
   "are the sons of God." (Rom. viii. 14.) We must show by our lives the
   family we belong to.--We must let men see by our good conversation that
   we are indeed the children of the Holy One, or our son-ship is but an
   empty name. "Say not," says Gurnall, "that thou hast royal blood in thy
   veins, and art born of God, except thou canst prove thy pedigree by
   daring to be holy."

   (f) We must be holy, because this is the most likely way to do good to
   others. We cannot live to ourselves only in this world. Our lives will
   always be doing either good or harm to those who see them. They are a
   silent sermon which all can read. It is sad indeed when they are a
   sermon for the devil's cause, and not for God's. I believe that far
   more is done for Christ's kingdom by the holy living of believers than
   we are at all aware of. There is a reality about such living which
   makes men feel, and obliges them to think. It carries a weight and
   influence with it which nothing else can give. It makes religion
   beautiful, and draws men to consider it, like a lighthouse seen afar
   off. The day of judgment will prove that many besides husbands have
   been won "without the word" by a holy life, (1 Pet. iii. 1.) You may
   talk to persons about the doctrines of the Gospels, and few will
   listen, and still fewer understand. But your life is an argument that
   none can escape. There is a meaning about holiness which not even the
   most unlearned can help taking in. They may not understand
   justification, but they can understand charity. I believe there is far
   more harm done by unholy and inconsistent Christians than we are aware
   of. Such men are among Satan's best allies. They pull down by their
   lives what ministers build with their lips. They cause the chariot
   wheels of the Gospel to drive heavily. They supply the children of this
   world with a never ending excuse for remaining as they are.--"I cannot
   see the use of so much religion," said an irreligious tradesman not
   long ago; "I observe that some of my customers are always talking about
   the Gospel, and faith, and election, and the blessed promises, and so
   forth; and yet these very people think nothing of cheating me of pence
   and half-pence, when they have an opportunity. Now, if religious
   persons can do such things, I do not see what good there is in
   religion."--I grieve to be obliged to write such things, but I fear
   that Christ's name is too often blasphemed because of the lives of
   Christians. Let us take heed lest the blood of souls should be required
   at our hands. From murder of souls by inconsistency and loose walking,
   good Lord, deliver us! Oh, for the sake of others, if for no other
   reason, let us strive to be holy!

   (g) We must be holy, because our present comfort depends much upon it.
   We cannot be too often reminded of this. We are sadly apt to forget
   that there is a close connection between sin and sorrow, holiness and
   happiness, sanctification and consolation. God has so wisely ordered
   it, that our well-being and our well-doing are linked together. He has
   mercifully provided that even in this world it shall be man's interest
   to be holy. Our justification is not by works--our calling and election
   are not according to our works--but it is vain for anyone to suppose
   that he will have a lively sense of his justification, or an assurance
   of his calling, so long as he neglects good works, or does not strive
   to live a holy life. "Hereby we do know that we know Him, if we keep
   His commandments."--"Hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall
   assure our hearts." (1 John ii. 3; iii. 19.) A believer may as soon
   expect to feel the sun's rays upon a dark and cloudy day, as to feel
   strong consolation in Christ while he does not follow Him fully. When
   the disciples forsook the Lord and fled, they escaped danger, but they
   were miserable and sad. When, shortly after, they confessed Him boldly
   before men, they were cast into prison and beaten; but we are told
   "they rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for His
   name." (Acts v. 41.) Oh, for our own sakes, if there were no other
   reason, let us strive to be holy! He that follows Jesus most fully will
   always follow Him most comfortably.

   (h) Lastly, we must be holy, because without holiness on earth we shall
   never be prepared to enjoy heaven. Heaven is a holy place. The Lord of
   heaven is a holy Being. The angels are holy creatures. Holiness is
   written on everything in heaven. The book of Revelation says expressly,
   "There shall in no wise enter into it anything that defileth, neither
   whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie." (Rev. xxi. 27.)

   I appeal solemnly to everyone who reads these pages, How shall we ever
   be at home and happy in heaven, if we die unholy? Death works no
   change. The grave makes no alteration. Each will rise again with the
   same character in which he breathed his last. Where will our place be
   if we are strangers to holiness now?

   Suppose for a moment that you were allowed to enter heaven without
   holiness. What would you do? What possible enjoyment could you feel
   there? To which of all the saints would you join yourself, and by whose
   side would you sit down? Their pleasures are not your pleasures, their
   tastes not your tastes, their character not your character. How could
   you possibly be happy, if you had not been holy on earth?

   Now perhaps you love the company of the light and the careless, the
   worldly-minded and the covetous, the reveller and the pleasure-seeker,
   the ungodly and the profane. There will be none such in heaven.

   Now perhaps you think the saints of God too strict and particular, and
   serious. You rather avoid them. You have no delight in their society.
   There will be no other company in heaven.

   Now perhaps you think praying, and Scripture-reading, and hymn singing,
   dull and melancholy, and stupid work--a thing to be tolerated now and
   then, but not enjoyed. You reckon the Sabbath a burden and a weariness;
   you could not possibly spend more than a small part of it in
   worshipping God. But remember, heaven is a never-ending Sabbath. The
   inhabitants thereof rest not day or night, saying, "Holy, holy, holy,
   Lord God Almighty" and singing the praise of the Lamb. How could an
   unholy man find pleasure in occupation such as this?

   Think you that such an one would delight to meet David, and Paul, and
   John, after a life spent in doing the very things they spoke against?
   Would he take sweet counsel with them, and find that he and they had
   much in common?--Think you, above all, that he would rejoice to meet
   Jesus, the Crucified One, face to face, after cleaving to the sins for
   which He died, after loving His enemies and despising His friends?
   Would he stand before Him with confidence, and join in the cry, "This
   is our God; we have waited for Him, we will be glad and rejoice in His
   salvation"? (Isa. xxv. 9.) Think you not rather that the tongue of an
   unholy man would cleave to the roof of his mouth with shame, and his
   only desire would be to be cast out! He would feel a stranger in a land
   he knew not, a black sheep amidst Christ's holy flock. The voice of
   Cherubim and Seraphim, the song of Angels and Archangels and all the
   company of heaven, would be a language he could not understand. The
   very air would seem an air he could not breathe. I know not what others
   may think, but to me it does seem clear that heaven would be a
   miserable place to an unholy man. It cannot be otherwise. People may
   say, in a vague way, "they hope to go to heaven;" but they do not
   consider what they say. There must be a certain "meetness for the
   inheritance of the saints in light." Our hearts must be somewhat in
   tune. To reach the holiday of glory, we must pass through the training
   school of grace. We must be heavenly-minded, and have heavenly tastes,
   in the life that now is, or else we shall never find ourselves in
   heaven, in the life to come.

   And now, before I go any further, let me say a few words by way of
   application.

   (1) For one thing, let me ask everyone who may read these pages, Are
   you holy? Listen, I pray you, to the question I put to you this day. Do
   you know anything of the holiness of which I have been speaking?

   I do not ask whether you attend your church regularly--whether you have
   been baptized, and received the Lord's Supper--whether you have the
   name of Christian--I ask something more than all this: Are you holy, or
   are you not?

   I do not ask whether you approve of holiness in others--whether you
   like to read the lives of holy people, and to talk of holy things, and
   to have on your table holy books--whether you mean to be holy, and hope
   you will be holy some day--I ask something further: Are you yourself
   holy this very day, or are you not?

   And why do I ask so straitly, and press the question so strongly? I do
   it because the Scripture says, "Without holiness no man shall see the
   Lord." It is written, it is not my fancy--it is the Bible, not my
   private opinion--it is the word of God, not of man--"Without holiness
   no man shall see the Lord." (Heb. xii. 14.)

   Alas, what searching, sifting words are these! What thoughts come
   across my mind, as I write them down! I look at the world, and see the
   greater part of it lying in wickedness. I look at professing
   Christians, and see the vast majority having nothing of Christianity
   but the name. I turn to the Bible, and I hear the Spirit saying,
   "Without holiness no man shall see the Lord."

   Surely it is a text that ought to make us consider our ways, and search
   our hearts. Surely it should raise within us solemn thoughts, and send
   us to prayer.

   You may try to put me off by saying "you feel much, and think much
   about these things: far more than many suppose." I answer, "This is not
   the point. The poor lost souls in hell do as much as this. The great
   question is not what you think, and what you feel, but what you do.

   You may say, "It was never meant that all Christians should be holy,
   and that holiness, such as I have described, is only for great saints,
   and people of uncommon gifts." I answer, "I cannot see that in
   Scripture. I read that every man who hath hope in Christ purifieth
   himself." (1 John iii. 3.)--"Without holiness no man shall see the
   Lord."

   You may say, "It is impossible to be so holy and to do our duty in this
   life at the same time: the thing cannot be done." I answer, "You are
   mistaken. It can be done. With Christ on your side nothing is
   impossible. It has been done by many. David, and Obadiah, and Daniel,
   and the servants of Nero's household, are all examples that go to prove
   it."

   You may say, "If I were so holy I would be unlike other people." I
   answer, "I know it well. It is just what you ought to be. Christ's true
   servants always were unlike the world around them--a separate nation, a
   peculiar people;--and you must be so too, if you would be saved!"

   You may say, "At this rate very few will be saved." I answer, "I know
   it. It is precisely what we are told in the Sermon on the Mount." The
   Lord Jesus said so 1,900 years ago. "Strait is the gate, and narrow is
   the way, that leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." (Matt.
   vii. 14.) Few will be saved, because few will take the trouble to seek
   salvation. Men will not deny themselves the pleasures of sin and their
   own way for a little season. They turn their backs on an "inheritance
   incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away." "Ye will not come
   unto Me," says Jesus, "that ye might have life." (John v. 40.)

   You may say, "These are hard sayings: the way is very narrow." I
   answer, "I know it. So says the Sermon on the Mount." The Lord Jesus
   said so 1,900 years ago. He always said that men must take up the cross
   daily, and that they must be ready to cut off hand or foot, if they
   would be His disciples. It is in religion as it is in other things,
   "there are no gains without pains." That which costs nothing is worth
   nothing.

   Whatever we may think fit to say, we must be holy, if we would see the
   Lord. Where is our Christianity if we are not? We must not merely have
   a Christian name, and Christian knowledge, we must have a Christian
   character also. We must be saints on earth, if ever we mean to be
   saints in heaven. God has said it, and He will not go back: "Without
   holiness no man shall see the Lord." "The Pope's calendar," says
   Jenkyn, "only makes saints of the dead, but Scripture requires sanctity
   in the living." "Let not men deceive themselves," says Owen;
   "sanctification is a qualification indispensably necessary unto those
   who will be under the conduct of the Lord Christ unto salvation. He
   leads none to heaven but whom He sanctifies on the earth. This living
   Head will not admit of dead members."

   Surely we need not wonder that Scripture says "Ye must be born again."
   (John iii. 7.) Surely it is clear as noon-day that many professing
   Christians need a complete change--new hearts, new natures--if ever
   they are to be saved. Old things must pass away--they must become new
   creatures. "Without holiness no man," be he who he may, "shall see the
   Lord."

   (2) Let me, for another thing, speak a little to believers. I ask you
   this question, "Do you think you feel the importance of holiness as
   much as you should?"

   I own I fear the temper of the times about this subject. I doubt
   exceedingly whether it holds that place which it deserves in the
   thoughts and attention of some of the Lord's people. I would humbly
   suggest that we are apt to overlook the doctrine of growth in grace,
   and that we do not sufficiently consider how very far a person may go
   in a profession of religion, and yet have no grace, and be dead in
   God's sight after all. I believe that Judas Iscariot seemed very like
   the other Apostles. When the Lord warned them that one would betray
   Him, no one said, "Is it Judas?" We had better think more about the
   Churches of Sardis and Laodicea than we do.

   I have no desire to make an idol of holiness. I do not wish to dethrone
   Christ, and put holiness in His place. But I must candidly say, I wish
   sanctification was more thought of in this day than it seems to be, and
   I therefore take occasion to press the subject on all believers into
   whose hands these pages may fall. I fear it is sometimes forgotten that
   God has married together justification and sanctification. They are
   distinct and different things, beyond question, but one is never found
   without the other. All justified people are sanctified, and all
   sanctified are justified. What God has joined together let no man dare
   to put asunder. Tell me not of your justification, unless you have also
   some marks of sanctification. Boast not of Christ's work for you,
   unless you can show us the Spirit's work in you. Think not that Christ
   and the Spirit can ever be divided. I doubt not that many believers
   know these things, but I think it good for us to be put in remembrance
   of them. Let us prove that we know them by our lives. Let us try to
   keep in view this text more continually: "Follow holiness, without
   which no man shall see the Lord."

   I must frankly say I wish there was not such an excessive sensitiveness
   on the subject of holiness as I sometimes perceive in the minds of
   believers. A man might really think it was a dangerous subject to
   handle, so cautiously is it touched! Yet surely when we have exalted
   Christ as "the way, the truth, and the life," we cannot err in speaking
   strongly about what should be the character of His people. Well says
   Rutherford, "The way that crieth down duties and sanctification, is not
   the way of grace. Believing and doing are blood-friends."

   I would say it with all reverence, but say it I must--I sometimes fear
   if Christ were on earth now, there are not a few who would think His
   preaching legal; and if Paul were writing his Epistles, there are those
   who would think he had better not write the latter part of most of them
   as he did. But let us remember that the Lord Jesus did speak the Sermon
   on the Mount, and that the Epistle to the Ephesians contains six
   chapters and not four. I grieve to feel obliged to speak in this way,
   but I am sure there is a cause.

   That great divine, John Owen, the Dean of Christ Church, used to say,
   more than two hundred years ago, that there were people whose whole
   religion seemed to consist in going about complaining of their own
   corruptions, and telling everyone that they could do nothing of
   themselves. I am afraid that after two centuries the same thing might
   be said with truth of some of Christ's professing people in this day. I
   know there are texts in Scripture which warrant such complaints. I do
   not object to them when they come from men who walk in the steps of the
   Apostle Paul, and fight a good fight, as he did, against sin, the
   devil, and the world. But I never like such complaints when I see
   ground for suspecting, as I often do, that they are only a cloak to
   cover spiritual laziness, and an excuse for spiritual sloth. If we say
   with Paul, "O wretched man that I am," let us also be able to say with
   him, "I press toward the mark." Let us not quote his example in one
   thing, while we do not follow him in another. (Rom. vii. 24; Philip.
   iii. 14.)

   I do not set up myself to be better than other people, and if anyone
   asks, "What are you, that you write in this way?" I answer, "I am a
   very poor creature indeed." But I say that I cannot read the Bible
   without desiring to see many believers more spiritual, more holy, more
   single-eyed, more heavenly-minded, more whole-hearted than they are in
   the nineteenth century. I want to see among believers more of a pilgrim
   spirit, a more decided separation from the world, a conversation more
   evidently in heaven, a closer walk with God--and therefore I have
   written as I have.

   Is it not true that we need a higher standard of personal holiness in
   this day? Where is our patience? Where is our zeal? Where is our love?
   Where are our works? Where is the power of religion to be seen, as it
   was in times gone by? Where is that unmistakable tone which used to
   distinguish the saints of old, and shake the world? Verily our silver
   has become dross, our wine mixed with water, and our salt has very
   little savour. We are all more than half asleep. The night is far
   spent, and the day is at hand. Let us awake, and sleep no more. Let us
   open our eyes more widely than we have done hitherto. "Let us lay aside
   every weight, and the sin that doth so easily beset us."--"Let us
   cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and perfect
   holiness in the fear of God."--(Heb. xii. i; 2 Cor. vii. 1.) "Did
   Christ die," says Owen, "and shall sin live? Was He crucified in the
   world, and shall our affections to the world be quick and lively? Oh,
   where is the spirit of him, who by the cross of Christ was crucified to
   the world, and the world to him!"

   III. Let me, in the last place, offer a word of advice to all who
   desire to be holy.

   Would you be holy? Would you become a new creature? Then you must begin
   with Christ. You will do just nothing at all, and make no progress till
   you feel your sin and weakness, and flee to Him. He is the root and
   beginning of all holiness, and the way to be holy is to come to Him by
   faith and be joined to Him. Christ is not wisdom and righteousness only
   to His people, but sanctification also. Men sometimes try to make
   themselves holy first of all, and sad work they make of it. They toil
   and labour, and turn over new leaves, and make many changes; and yet,
   like the woman with the issue of blood, before she came to Christ, they
   feel "nothing bettered, but rather worse." (Mark v. 26.) They run in
   vain, and labour in vain; and little wonder, for they are beginning at
   the wrong end. They are building up a wall of sand; their work runs
   down as fast as they throw it up. They are baling water out of a leaky
   vessel: the leak gains on them, not they on the leak. Other foundation
   of "holiness" can no man lay than that which Paul laid, even Christ
   Jesus. "Without Christ we can do nothing." (John xv. 5.) It is a strong
   but true saying of Traill's, "Wisdom out of Christ is damning
   folly--righteousness out of Christ is guilt and
   condemnation--sanctification out of Christ is filth and sin--redemption
   out of Christ is bondage and slavery."

   Do you want to attain holiness? Do you feel this day a real hearty
   desire to be holy? Would you be a partaker of the Divine nature? Then
   go to Christ. Wait for nothing. Wait for nobody. Linger not. Think not
   to make yourself ready. Go and say to Him, in the words of that
   beautiful hymn--


   Nothing in my hand I bring,

   Simply to Thy cross I cling;

   Naked, flee to Thee for dress;

   Helpless, look to Thee for grace."

   There is not a brick nor a stone laid in the work of our sanctification
   till we go to Christ. Holiness is His special gift to His believing
   people. Holiness is the work He carries on in their hearts, by the
   Spirit whom He puts within them. He is appointed a "Prince and a
   Saviour, to give repentance" as well as remission of sins.--"To as many
   as receive Him, He gives power to become sons of God." (Acts v. 31;
   John i. 12, 13.) Holiness comes not of blood--parents cannot give it to
   their children: nor yet of the will of the flesh--man cannot produce it
   in himself: nor yet of the will of man--ministers cannot give it you by
   baptism. Holiness comes from Christ. It is the result of vital union
   with Him, It is the fruit of being a living branch of the True Vine. Go
   then to Christ and say, "Lord, not only save me from the guilt of sin,
   but send the Spirit, whom Thou didst promise, and save me from its
   power. Make me holy. Teach me to do Thy will."

   Would you continue holy? Then abide in Christ. He says Himself, "Abide
   in Me and I in you,--he that abideth in Me and I in him, the same
   beareth much fruit. (John xv. 4, 5.) It pleased the Father that in Him
   should all fulness dwell--a full supply for all a believer's wants. He
   is the Physician to whom you must daily go, if you would keep well. He
   is the Manna which you must daily eat, and the Rock of which you must
   daily drink. His arm is the arm on which you must daily lean, as you
   come up out of the wilderness of this world. You must not only be
   rooted, you must also be built up in Him. Paul was a man of God
   indeed--a holy man--a growing, thriving Christian--and what was the
   secret of it all? He was one to whom Christ was "all in all." He was
   ever "looking unto Jesus." "I can do all things," he says, "through
   Christ which strengthened me." "I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in
   me. The life that I now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God."
   Let us go and do likewise. (Heb. xii. 2; Phil. iv. 13; Gal. ii. 20.)

   May all who read these pages know these things by experience, and not
   by hearsay only. May we all feel the importance of holiness, far more
   than we have ever done yet! May our years be holy years with our souls,
   and then they will be happy ones! Whether we live, may we live unto the
   Lord; or whether we die, may we die unto the Lord; of if He comes for
   us, may we be found in peace, without spot, and blameless!
     __________________________________________________________________

IV.
THE FIGHT

   "Fight the good fight of faith."--1 Timothy vi. 12.

   IT is a curious fact that there is no subject about which most people
   feel such deep interest as "fighting." Young men and maidens, old men
   and little children, high and low, rich and poor, learned and
   unlearned, all feel a deep interest in wars, battles and fighting.

   This is a simple fact, whatever way we may try to explain it. We should
   call that Englishman a dull fellow who cared nothing about the story of
   Waterloo, or Inkermann, or Balaclava or Lucknow. We should think that
   heart cold and stupid which was not moved and thrilled by the struggles
   at Sedan and Strasburg, and Metz, and Paris, during the war between
   France and Germany.

   But there is another warfare of far greater importance than any war
   that was ever waged by man. It is a warfare which concerns not two or
   three nations only, but every Christian man and woman born into the
   world. The warfare I speak of is the spiritual warfare. It is the fight
   which everyone who would be saved must fight about his soul.

   This warfare, I am aware, is a thing of which many know nothing. Talk
   to them about it, and they are ready to set you down as a madman, an
   enthusiast, or a fool. And yet it is as real and true as any war the
   world has ever seen. It has its hand-to-hand conflicts and its wounds.
   It has its watchings and fatigues. It has its sieges and assaults. It
   has its victories and its defeats. Above all, it has consequences which
   are awful, tremendous, and most peculiar. In earthly warfare the
   consequences to nations are often temporary and remediable. In the
   spiritual warfare it is very different. Of that warfare, the
   consequences, when the fight is over, are unchangeable and eternal.

   It is of this warfare that St. Paul spoke to Timothy, when he wrote
   those burning words, "Fight the good fight of faith; lay hold on
   eternal life." It is of this warfare that I propose to speak in this
   paper. I hold the subject to be closely connected with that of
   sanctification and holiness. He that would understand the nature of
   true holiness must know that the Christian is "a man of war." If we
   would be holy we must fight.

   I. The first thing I have to say is this: True Christianity is a fight.

   True Christianity! Let us mind that word "true." There is a vast
   quantity of religion current in the world which is not true, genuine
   Christianity. It passes muster; it satisfies sleepy consciences; but it
   is not good money. It is not the real thing which was called
   Christianity eighteen hundred years ago. There are thousands of men and
   women who go to churches and chapels every Sunday, and call themselves
   Christians. Their names are in the baptismal register. They are
   reckoned Christians while they live. They are married with a Christian
   marriage service. They mean to be buried as Christians when they die.
   But you never see any "fight" about their religion! Of spiritual
   strife, and exertion, and conflict, and self-denial, and watching, and
   warring, they know literally nothing at all. Such Christianity may
   satisfy man, and those who say anything against it may be thought very
   hard and uncharitable; but it certainly is not the Christianity of the
   Bible. It is not the religion which the Lord Jesus founded, and His
   Apostles preached. It is not the religion which produces real holiness.
   True Christianity is "a fight."

   The true Christian is called to be a soldier, and must behave as such
   from the day of his conversion to the day of his death. He is not meant
   to live a life of religious ease, indolence, and security. He must
   never imagine for a moment that he can sleep and doze along the way to
   heaven, like one travelling in an easy carriage. If he takes his
   standard of Christianity from the children of this world, he may be
   content with such notions; but he will find no countenance for them in
   the Word of God. If the Bible is the rule of his faith and practice, he
   will find his course laid down very plainly in this matter. He must
   "fight."

   With whom is the Christian soldier meant to fight? Not with other
   Christians. Wretched indeed is that man's idea of religion who fancies
   that it consists in perpetual controversy! He who is never satisfied
   unless he is engaged in some strife between church and church, chapel
   and chapel, sect and sect, faction and faction, party and party, knows
   nothing yet as he ought to know. No doubt it may be absolutely needful
   sometimes to appeal to law courts, in order to ascertain the right
   interpretation of a Church's Articles, and rubrics, and formularies.
   But, as a general rule, the cause of sin is never so much helped as
   when Christians waste their strength in quarrelling with one another,
   and spend their time in petty squabbles.

   No, indeed! The principal fight of the Christian is with the world, the
   flesh, and the devil. These are his never-dying foes. These are the
   three chief enemies against whom he must wage war. Unless he gets the
   victory over these three, all other victories are useless and vain. If
   he had a nature like an angel, and were not a fallen creature, the
   warfare would not be so essential. But with a corrupt heart, a busy
   devil, and an ensnaring world, he must either "fight" or be lost.

   He must fight the flesh. Even after conversion he carries within him a
   nature prone to evil, and a heart weak and unstable as water. That
   heart will never be free from imperfection in this world, and it is a
   miserable delusion to expect it. To keep that heart from going astray,
   the Lord Jesus bids us "watch and pray." The spirit may be ready, but
   the flesh is weak. There is need of a daily struggle and a daily
   wrestling in prayer. "I keep under my body," cries St. Paul, "and bring
   it into subjection."'--"I see a law in my members warring against the
   law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity."--"O wretched man that
   I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?"--"They that
   are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and
   lusts."--"Mortify your members which are upon the earth." (Mark xiv.
   38; 1 Cor. ix. 27; Rom. vii. 23, 24; Gal. v. 24; Coloss. iii. 5.)

   He must fight the world. The subtle influence of that mighty enemy must
   be daily resisted, and without a daily battle can never be overcome.
   The love of the world's good things--the fear of the world's laughter
   or blame--the secret desire to keep in with the world--the secret wish
   to do as others in the world do, and not to run into extremes--all
   these are spiritual foes which beset the Christian continually on his
   way to heaven, and must be conquered. "The friendship of the world is
   enmity with God: whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is
   the enemy of God."--"If any man love the world, the love of the Father
   is not in him."--"The world is crucified to Me, and I unto the
   world."--"Whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world."--"Be not
   conformed to this world." (James iv. 4; 1 John ii. 15; Gal. vi. 14; 1
   John v. 4; Rom. xii. 2.)

   He must fight the devil. That old enemy of mankind is not dead. Ever
   since the fall of Adam and Eve he has been "going to and fro in the
   earth, and walking up and down in it," and striving to compass one
   great end--the ruin of man's soul. Never slumbering and never sleeping,
   he is always "going about as a lion seeking whom he may devour." An
   unseen enemy, he is always near us, about our path and about our bed,
   and spying out all our ways. A "murderer and a liar" from the
   beginning, he labours night and day to cast us down to hell. Sometimes
   by leading into superstition, sometimes by suggesting infidelity,
   sometimes by one kind of tactics and sometimes by another, he is always
   carrying on a campaign against our souls. "Satan hath desired to have
   you, that he may sift you as wheat." This mighty adversary must be
   daily resisted if we wish to be saved. But "this kind goeth not out"
   but by watching and praying, and fighting, and putting on the whole
   armour of God. The strong man armed will never be kept out of our
   hearts without a daily battle. (Job i. 7; 1 Peter v. 8; John viii. 44;
   Luke xxii. 31; Ephes. vi. 11.)

   Some men may think these statements too strong. You fancy that I am
   going too far, and laying on the colours too thickly. You are secretly
   saying to yourself, that men and women in England may surely get to
   heaven without all this trouble and warfare and fighting. Listen to me
   for a few minutes and I will show you that I have something to say on
   God's behalf. Remember the maxim of the wisest General that ever lived
   in England--"In time of war it is the worst mistake to underrate your
   enemy, and try to make a little war." This Christian warfare is no
   light matter. Give me your attention and consider what I say. What
   saith the Scripture?--"Fight the good fight of faith. Lay hold on
   eternal life.--"Endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus
   Christ."--"Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand
   against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and
   blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the ruler of
   the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high
   places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that you may
   be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all to
   stand."--"Strive to enter in at the strait gate."--"Labour for the meat
   that endureth unto everlasting life."--"Think not that I came to send
   peace on the earth: I came not to send peace but a sword."--"He that
   hath no sword let him sell his garment and buy one."--"Watch ye, stand
   fast in the faith: quit you like men, be strong."--"War a good warfare,
   holding faith and a good conscience." (1 Tim. vi. 12; 2 Tim. ii. 3;
   Ephes. vi. 11-13; Luke xiii. 24; John vi. 27; Matt. x. 34; Luke xxii.
   36; 1 Cor. xvi. 13; 1 Tim. i. 18, 19.) Words such as these appear to me
   clear, plain, and unmistakable. They all teach one and the same great
   lesson, if we are willing to receive it. That lesson is, that true
   Christianity is a struggle, a fight, and a warfare. He that pretends to
   condemn "fighting" and teaches that we ought to sit still and "yield
   ourselves to God," appears to me to misunderstand his Bible, and to
   make a great mistake.

   What says the Baptismal Service of the Church of England? No doubt that
   Service is uninspired, and, like every uninspired composition, it has
   its defects; but to the millions of people all over the globe, who
   profess and call themselves English Churchmen, its voice ought to speak
   with some weight. And what does it say? It tells us that over every new
   member who is admitted into the Church of England the following words
   are used--"I baptize thee in the name of the Father, the Son, and the
   Holy Ghost."--"I sign this child with the sign of the cross, in token
   that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ
   crucified, and manfully to fight under His banner against sin, the
   world, and the devil, and to continue Christ's faithful soldier and
   servant unto his life's end."--Of course we all know that in myriads of
   cases baptism is a mere form, and that parents bring their children to
   the font without faith or prayer or thought, and consequently receive
   no blessing. The man who supposes that baptism in such cases acts
   mechanically, like a medicine, and that godly and ungodly, praying and
   prayerless parents, all alike get the same benefit for their children,
   must be in a strange state of mind. But one thing, at any rate, is very
   certain. Every baptized Churchman is by his profession a "soldier of
   Jesus Christ," and is pledged "to fight under His banner against sin,
   the world, and the devil." He that doubts it had better take up his
   Prayer-book, and read, mark, and learn its contents. The worst thing
   about many very zealous Churchmen is their total ignorance of what
   their own Prayer-book contains.

   Whether we are Churchmen or not, one thing is certain--this Christian
   warfare is a great reality, and a subject of vast importance. It is not
   a matter like Church government and ceremonial, about which men may
   differ, and yet reach heaven at last. Necessity is laid upon us. We
   must fight. There are no promises in the Lord Jesus Christ's Epistles
   to the Seven Churches, except to those who "overcome." Where there is
   grace there will be conflict. The believer is a soldier. There is no
   holiness without a warfare. Saved souls will always be found to have
   fought a fight.

   It is a fight of absolute necessity. Let us not think that in this war
   we can remain neutral and sit still. Such a line of action may be
   possible in the strife of nations, but it is utterly impossible in that
   conflict which concerns the soul. The boasted policy of
   noninterference--the "masterly inactivity" which pleases so many
   statesmen--the plan of keeping quiet and letting things alone--all this
   will never do in the Christian warfare. Here at any rate no one can
   escape serving under the plea that he is "a man of peace." To be at
   peace with the world, the flesh and the devil, is to be at enmity with
   God, and in the broad way that leadeth to destruction. We have no
   choice or option. We must either fight or be lost.

   It is a fight of universal necessity. No rank, or class, or age, can
   plead exemption, or escape the battle. Ministers and people, preachers
   and hearers, old and young, high and low, rich and poor, gentle and
   simple, kings and subjects, landlords and tenants, learned and
   unlearned--all alike must carry arms and go to war. All have by nature
   a heart full of pride, unbelief, sloth, worldliness, and sin. All are
   living in a world beset with snares, traps, and pitfalls for the soul.
   All have near them a busy, restless, malicious devil. All, from the
   queen in her palace down to the pauper in the workhouse, all must
   fight, if they would be saved.

   It is a fight of perpetual necessity. It admits of no breathing time,
   no armistice, no truce. On week-days as well as on Sundays--in private
   as well as in public--at home by the family fireside as well as
   abroad--in little things like management of tongue and temper, as well
   as in great ones like the government of kingdoms--the Christian's
   warfare must unceasingly go on. The foe we have to do with keeps no
   holidays, never slumbers, and never sleeps. So long as we have breath
   in our bodies we must keep on our armour, and remember we are on an
   enemy's ground. "Even on the brink of Jordan," said a dying saint, "I
   find Satan nibbling at my heels." We must fight till we die.

   Let us consider well these propositions. Let us take care that our own
   personal religion is real, genuine, and true. The saddest symptom about
   many so-called Christians is the utter absence of anything like
   conflict and fight in their Christianity. They eat, they drink, they
   dress, they work, they amuse themselves, they get money, they spend
   money, they go through a scanty round of formal religious services once
   or twice every week. But the great spiritual warfare--its watchings and
   strugglings, its agonies and anxieties, its battles and contests--of
   all this they appear to know nothing at all. Let us take care that this
   case is not our own. The worst state of soul is "when the strong man
   armed keepeth the house, and his goods are at peace"--when he leads men
   and women "captive at his will," and they make no resistance. The worst
   chains are those which are neither felt nor seen by the prisoner. (Luke
   xi. 21; 2 Tim. ii. 26.)

   We may take comfort about our souls if we know anything of an inward
   fight and conflict. It is the invariable companion of genuine Christian
   holiness. It is not everything, I am well aware, ut it is something. Do
   we find in our heart of hearts a spiritual struggle? Do we feel
   anything of the flesh lusting against the spirit and the spirit against
   the flesh, so that we cannot do the things we would? (Gal. v. 17.) Are
   we conscious of two principles within us, contending for the mastery?
   Do we feel anything of war in our inward man? Well, let us thank God
   for it! It is a good sign. It is strongly probable evidence of the
   great work of sanctification. All true saints are soldiers. Anything is
   better than apathy, stagnation, deadness, and indifference. We are in a
   better state than many. The most part of so-called Christians have no
   feeling at all. We are evidently no friends of Satan. Like the kings of
   this world, he wars not against his own subjects. The very fact that he
   assaults us should fill our minds with hope. I say again, let us take
   comfort. The child of God has two great marks about him, and of these
   two we have one. HE MAY BE KNOWN BY HIS INWARD WARFARE, AS WELL AS BY
   HIS INWARD PEACE.

   II. I pass on to the second thing which I have to say in handling my
   subject: True Christianity is the fight of faith.

   In this respect the Christian warfare is utterly unlike the conflicts
   of this world. It does not depend on the strong arm, the quick eye, or
   the swift foot. It is not waged with carnal weapons, but with
   spiritual. Faith is the hinge on which victory turns. Success depends
   entirely on believing.

   A general faith in the truth of God's written Word is the primary
   foundation of the Christian soldier's character. He is what he is, does
   what he does, thinks as he thinks, acts as he acts, hopes as he hopes,
   behaves as he behaves, for one simple reason--he believes certain
   propositions revealed and laid down in Holy Scripture. "He that cometh
   to God must believe that He is, and that He is a Rewarder of them that
   diligently seek Him." (Heb. xi. 5.)

   A religion without doctrine or dogma is a thing which many are fond of
   talking of in the present day. It sounds very fine at first. It looks
   very pretty at a distance. But the moment we sit down to examine and
   consider it, we shall find it a simple impossibility. We might as well
   talk of a body without bones and sinews. No man will ever be anything
   or do anything in religion, unless he believes something. Even those
   who profess to hold the miserable and uncomfortable views of the Deists
   are obliged to confess that they believe something. With all their
   bitter sneers against dogmatic theology and Christian credulity, as
   they call it, they themselves have a kind of faith.

   As for true Christians, faith is the very backbone of their spiritual
   existence. No one ever fights earnestly against the world, the flesh
   and the devil, unless he has engraven on his heart certain great
   principles which he believes. What they are he may hardly know, and may
   certainly not be able to define or write down. But there they are, and,
   consciously or unconsciously, they form the roots of his religion.
   Wherever you see a man, whether rich or poor, learned or unlearned,
   wrestling manfully with sin, and trying to overcome it, you may be sure
   there are certain great principles which that man believes. The poet
   who wrote the famous lines:


   "For modes of faith let graceless zealots fight,

   He can't be wrong whose life is in the right,"

   was a clever man, but a poor divine. There is no such thing as right
   living without faith and believing.

   A special faith in our Lord Jesus Christ's person, work, and office, is
   the life, heart, and mainspring of the Christian soldier's character.

   He sees by faith an unseen Saviour, who loved him, gave Himself for
   him, paid his debts for him, bore his sins, carried his transgressions,
   rose again for him, and appears in heaven for him as his Advocate at
   the right hand of God. He sees Jesus, and clings to Him. Seeing this
   Saviour and trusting in Him, he feels peace and hope, and willingly
   does battle against the foes of his soul.

   He sees his own many sins--his weak heart, a tempting world, a busy
   devil; and if he looked only at them he might well despair. But he sees
   also a mighty Saviour, an interceding Saviour, a sympathizing
   Saviour--His blood, His righteousness, His everlasting priesthood--and
   he believes that all this is his own. He sees Jesus, and casts his
   whole weight on Him. Seeing Him he cheerfully fights on, with a full
   confidence that he will prove "more than conqueror through Him that
   loved him." (Rom. viii. 37.)

   Habitual lively faith in Christ's presence and readiness to help is the
   secret of the Christian soldier fighting successfully.

   It must never be forgotten that faith admits of degrees. All men do not
   believe alike, and even the same person has his ebbs and flows of
   faith, and believes more heartily at one time than another. According
   to the degree of his faith the Christian fights well or ill, wins
   victories, or suffers occasional repulses, comes off triumphant, or
   loses a battle. He that has most faith will always be the happiest and
   most comfortable soldier. Nothing makes the anxieties of warfare sit so
   lightly on a man as the assurance of Christ's love and continual
   protection. Nothing enables him to bear the fatigue of watching,
   struggling, and wrestling against sin, like the indwelling confidence
   that Christ is on his side and success is sure. It is the "shield of
   faith" which quenches all the fiery darts of the wicked one.--It is the
   man who can say, "I know whom I have believed"--who can say in time of
   suffering, "I am not ashamed."--He who wrote those glowing words, "We
   faint not,"--"Our light affliction which endureth but for a moment
   worketh in us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory"--was
   the man who wrote with the same pen, "We look not at the things which
   are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things which
   are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
   eternal."--It is the man who said, "I live by the faith of the Son of
   God," who said, in the same Epistle, "the world is crucified unto me,
   and I unto the world."--It is the man who said, "To me to live is
   Christ," who said, in the same Epistle, "I have learned in whatsoever
   state I am therewith to be content."--"I can do all things through
   Christ."--The more faith the more victory! The more faith the more
   inward peace! (Eph. vi. 16; 2 Tim. i. 12; 2 Cor. iv. 17, 18; Gal. ii.
   20; vi. 14; Phil. i. 21; iv. 11, 13.)

   I think it impossible to overrate the value and importance of faith.
   Well may the Apostle Peter call it "precious." (2 Pet. i. 1.) Time
   would fail me if I tried to recount a hundredth part of the victories
   which by faith Christian soldiers have obtained.

   Let us take down our Bibles and read with attention the eleventh
   chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Let us mark the long list of
   worthies whose names are thus recorded, from Abel down to Moses, even
   before Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, and brought life and
   immortality into full light by the Gospel. Let us note well what
   battles they won against the world, the flesh, and the devil. And then
   let us remember that believing did it all. These men looked forward to
   the promised Messiah. They saw Him that is invisible. "By faith the
   elders obtained a good report." (Heb. xi. 2-27.)

   Let us turn to the pages of early Church history. Let us see how the
   primitive Christians held fast their religion even unto death, and were
   not shaken by the fiercest persecutions of heathen Emperors. For
   centuries there were never wanting men like Polycarp and Ignatius, who
   were ready to die rather than deny Christ. Fines, and prisons, and
   torture, and fire, and sword, were unable to crush the spirit of the
   noble army of martyrs. The whole power of imperial Rome, the mistress
   of the world, proved unable to stamp out the religion which began with
   a few fishermen and publicans in Palestine! And then let us remember
   that believing in an unseen Jesus was the Church's strength. They won
   their victory by faith.

   Let us examine the story of the Protestant Reformation. Let us study
   the lives of its leading champions--Wycliffe, and Huss, and Luther, and
   Ridley, and Latimer, and Hooper. Let us mark how these gallant soldiers
   of Christ stood firm against a host of adversaries, and were ready to
   die for their principles. What battles they fought! What controversies
   they maintained! What contradiction they endured I What tenacity of
   purpose they exhibited against a world in arms! And then let us
   remember that believing in an unseen Jesus was the secret of their
   strength. They overcame by faith.

   Let us consider the men who have made the greatest marks in Church
   history in the last hundred years. Let us observe how men like Wesley,
   and Whitfield, and Venn, and Romaine, stood alone in their day and
   generation, and revived English religion in the face of opposition from
   men high in office, and in the face of slander, ridicule, and
   persecution from nine-tenths of professing Christians in our land. Let
   us observe how men like William Wilberforce, and Havelock, and Hedley
   Vicars, have witnessed for Christ in the most difficult positions, and
   displayed a banner for Christ even at the regimental mess-table, or on
   the floor of the House of Commons. Let us mark how these noble
   witnesses never flinched to the end, and won the respect even of their
   worst adversaries. And then let us remember that believing in an unseen
   Christ is the key to all their characters. By faith they lived, and
   walked, and stood, and overcame.

   Would anyone live the life of a Christian soldier? Let him pray for
   faith. It is the gift of God; and a gift which those who ask shall
   never ask for in vain. You must believe before you do. If men do
   nothing in religion, it is because they do not believe. Faith is the
   first step toward heaven.

   Would anyone fight the fight of a Christian soldier successfully and
   prosperously? Let him pray for a continual increase of faith. Let him
   abide in Christ, get closer to Christ, tighten his hold on Christ every
   day that he lives. Let his daily prayer be that of the
   disciples--"Lord, increase my faith." (Luke xvii. 5.) Watch jealously
   over your faith, if you have any. It is the citadel of the Christian
   character, on which the safety of the whole fortress depends. It is the
   point which Satan loves to assail. All lies at his mercy if faith is
   overthrown. Here, if we love life, we must especially stand on our
   guard.

   III. The last thing I have to say is this: True Christianity is a good
   fight.

   "Good" is a curious word to apply to any warfare. All worldly war is
   more or less evil. No doubt it is an absolute necessity in many
   cases--to procure the liberty of nations, to prevent the weak from
   being trampled down by the strong--but still it is an evil. It entails
   an awful amount of bloodshed and suffering. It hurries into eternity
   myriads who are completely unprepared for their change. It calls forth
   the worst passions of man. It causes enormous waste and destruction of
   property. It fills peaceful homes with mourning widows and orphans. It
   spreads far and wide poverty, taxation, and national distress. It
   disarranges all the order of society. It interrupts the work of the
   Gospel and the growth of Christian missions. In short, war is an
   immense and incalculable evil, and every praying man should cry night
   and day, "Give peace in our time." And yet there is one warfare which
   is emphatically "good," and one fight in which there is no evil. That
   warfare is the Christian warfare. That fight is the fight of the soul.

   Now what are the reasons why the Christian fight is a "good fight"?
   What are the points in which his warfare is superior to the warfare of
   this world? Let me examine this matter, and open it out in order. I
   dare not pass the subject and leave it unnoticed. I want no one to
   begin the life of a Christian soldier without counting the cost. I
   would not keep back from anyone that if he would be holy and see the
   Lord he must fight, and that the Christian fight though spiritual is
   real and severe. It needs courage, boldness, and perseverance. But I
   want my readers to know that there is abundant encouragement, if they
   will only begin the battle. The Scripture does not call the Christian
   fight "a good fight" without reason and cause. Let me try to show what
   I mean.

   (a) The Christian's fight is good because fought under the best of
   generals. The Leader and Commander of all believers is our Divine
   Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ--a Saviour of perfect wisdom, infinite
   love, and almighty power. The Captain of our salvation never fails to
   lead His soldiers to victory. He never makes any useless movements,
   never errs in judgment, never commits any mistake. His eye is on all
   His followers, from the greatest of them even to the least. The
   humblest servant in His army is not forgotten. The weakest and most
   sickly is cared for, remembered, and kept unto salvation. The souls
   whom He has purchased and redeemed with His own blood are far too
   precious to be wasted and thrown away. Surely this is good!

   (b) The Christian's fight is good, because fought with the best of
   helps. Weak as each believer is in himself, the Holy Spirit dwells in
   him, and his body is a temple of the Holy Ghost. Chosen by God the
   Father, washed in the blood of the Son, renewed by the Spirit, he does
   not go a warfare at his own charges, and is never alone. God the Holy
   Ghost daily teaches, leads, guides, and directs him. God the Father
   guards him by His almighty power. God the Son intercedes for him every
   moment, like Moses on the mount, while he is fighting in the valley
   below. A threefold cord like this can never be broken! His daily
   provisions and supplies never fail. His commissariat is never
   defective. His bread and his water are sure. Weak as he seems in
   himself, like a worm, he is strong in the Lord to do great exploits.
   Surely this is good!

   (c) The Christian fight is a good fight, because fought with the best
   of promises. To every believer belong exceeding great and precious
   promises--all Yea and Amen in Christ--promises sure to be fulfilled,
   because made by One who cannot lie, and has power as well as will to
   keep His word. "Sin shall not have dominion over you."--"The God of
   peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly."--"He that has begun
   a good work will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ."--"When thou
   passeth through the waters I will be with thee, and through the floods,
   they shall not overflow thee."--"My sheep shall never perish, neither
   shall anyone pluck them out of my hand."--"Him that cometh unto Me!
   will in no wise cast out."--"I will never leave thee, nor forsake
   thee."--"I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor things
   present, nor things to come, shall be able to separate us from the love
   of God, which is in Christ Jesus." (Rom. vi. 14; Rom. xvi. 20; Philip.
   i. 6; Isa. xliii. 2; John x. 28; John vi. 37; Heb. xiii. 5; Rom. viii.
   38.) Words like these are worth their weight in gold! Who does not know
   that promises of coming aid have cheered the defenders of besieged
   cities, like Lucknow, and raised them above their natural strength?
   Have we never heard that the promise of "help before night" had much to
   say to the mighty victory of Waterloo? Yet all such promises are as
   nothing compared to the rich treasure of believers, the eternal
   promises of God. Surely this is good!

   (d) The Christian's fight is a good fight, because fought with the best
   of issues and results. No doubt it is a wa� in which there an;
   tremendous struggles, agonizing conflicts, wounds, bruises, watchings,
   fastings, and fatigue. But still every believer, without exception, is
   "more than conqueror through Him that loved him." (Rom. viii. 37.) No
   soldiers of Christ are ever lost, missing, or left dead on the
   battlefield. No mourning will ever need to be put on, and no tears to
   be shed for either private or officer in the army of Christ. The muster
   roll, when the last evening comes, will be found precisely the same
   that it was in the morning. The English Guards marched out of London to
   the Crimean campaign a magnificent body of men; but many of the gallant
   fellows laid their bones in a foreign grave, and never saw London
   again. Far different shall be the arrival of the Christian army in "the
   city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God." (Heb. xi.
   10.) Not one shall be found lacking. The words of our great Captain
   shall be found true: "Of them which Thou hast given Me I have lost
   none." (John xviii. 9.) Surely this is good!

   (e) The Christian's fight is good, because it does good to the soul of
   him that fights it. All other wars have a bad, lowering, and
   demoralising tendency. They call forth the worst passions of the human
   mind. They harden the conscience, and sap the foundations of religion
   and morality. The Christian warfare alone tends to call forth the best
   things that are left in man. It promotes humility and charity, it
   lessens selfishness and worldliness, it induces men to set their
   affections on things above. The old, the sick, the dying, are never
   known to repent of fighting Christ's battles against sin, the world,
   and the devil. Their only regret is that they did not begin to serve
   Christ long before. The experience of that eminent saint, Philip Henry,
   does not stand alone. In his last days he said to his family, "I take
   you all to record that a life spent in the service of Christ is the
   happiest life that a man can spend upon earth." Surely this is good!

   (f) The Christian's fight is a good fight, because it does good to the
   world. All other wars have a devastating, ravaging, and injurious
   effect. The march of an army through a land is an awful scourge to the
   inhabitants. Wherever it goes it impoverishes, wastes, and does harm.
   Injury to persons, property, feelings, and morals invariably
   accompanies it. Far different are the effects produced by Christian
   soldiers. Wherever they live they are a blessing. They raise the
   standard of religion and morality. They invariably check the progress
   of drunkenness. Sabbath-breaking, profligacy, and dishonesty. Even
   their enemies are obliged to respect them. Go where you please, you
   will rarely find that barracks and garrisons do good to the
   neighbourhood. But go where you please, you will find that the presence
   of a few true Christians is a blessing. Surely this is good!

   (g) Finally, the Christian's fight is good, because it ends in a
   glorious reward for all who fight it. Who can tell the wages that
   Christ will pay to all His faithful people? Who can estimate the good
   things that our Divine Captain has laid up for those who confess Him
   before men? A grateful country can give to her successful warriors
   medals, Victoria Crosses, pensions, peerages, honours, and titles. But
   it can give nothing that will last and endure for ever, nothing that
   can be carried beyond the grave. Palaces like Blenheim and
   Strathfieldsay can only be enjoyed for a few years. The bravest
   generals and soldiers must go down one day before the King of Terrors.
   Better, far better, is the position of him who fights under Christ's
   banner against sin, the world, and the devil. He may get little praise
   of man while he lives, and go down to the grave with little honour; but
   he shall have that which is far better, because far more enduring. He
   shall have "a crown of glory that fadeth not away." (1 Pet. v. 4.)
   Surely this is good!

   Let us settle it in our minds that the Christian fight is a good
   fight--really good, truly good, emphatically good. We see only part of
   it as yet. We see the struggle, but not the end; we see the campaign,
   but not the reward; we see the cross, but not the crown. We see a few
   humble, broken-spirited, penitent, praying people, enduring hardships
   and despised by the world; but we see not the hand of God over them,
   the face of God smiling on them, the kingdom of glory prepared for
   them. These things are yet to be revealed. Let us not judge by
   appearances. There are more good things about the Christian warfare
   than we see.

   And now let me conclude my whole subject with a few words of practical
   application. Our lot is cast in times when the world seems thinking of
   little else but battles and fighting. The iron is entering into the
   soul of more than one nation, and the mirth of many a fair district is
   clean gone. Surely in times like these a minister may fairly call on
   men to remember their spiritual warfare. Let me say a few parting words
   about the great fight of the soul.

   (1) It may be you are struggling hard for the rewards of this world.
   Perhaps you are straining every nerve to obtain money, or place, or
   power, or pleasure. If that be your case, take care. Your sowing will
   lead to a crop of bitter disappointment. Unless you mind what you are
   about your latter end will be to lie down in sorrow.

   Thousands have trodden the path you are pursuing, and have awoke too
   late to find it end in misery and eternal ruin. They have fought hard
   for wealth, and honour, and office, and promotion, and turned their
   backs on God, and Christ, and heaven, and the world to come. And what
   has their end been? Often, far too often, they have found out that
   their whole life has been a grand mistake. They have tasted by bitter
   experience the feelings of the dying statesman who cried aloud in his
   last hours, "The battle is fought: the battle is fought: but the
   victory is not won."

   For your own happiness' sake resolve this day to join the Lord's side.
   Shake off your past carelessness and unbelief. Come out from the ways
   of a thoughtless, unreasoning world. Take up the cross, and become a
   good soldier of Christ. "Fight the good fight of faith," that you may
   be happy as well as safe.

   Think what the children of this world will often do for liberty,
   without any religious principle. Remember how Greeks, and Romans, and
   Swiss, and Tyrolese, have endured the loss of all things, and even life
   itself, rather than bend their necks to a foreign yoke. Let their
   example provoke you to emulation. If men can do so much for a
   corruptible crown, how much more should you do for one which is
   incorruptible! Awake to a sense of the misery of being a slave. For
   fife, and happiness, and liberty, arise and fight.

   Fear not to begin and enlist under Christ's banner. The great Captain
   of your salvation rejects none that come to Him. Like David in the cave
   of Adullam, He is ready to receive all who apply to Him, however
   unworthy they may feel themselves. None who repent and believe are too
   bad to be enrolled in the ranks of Christ's army. All who come to Him
   by faith are admitted, clothed, armed, trained, and finally led on to
   complete victory. Fear not to begin this very day. There is yet room
   for you.

   Fear not to go on fighting, if you once enlist. The more thorough and
   whole-hearted you are as a soldier, the more comfortable will you find
   your warfare. No doubt you will often meet with trouble, fatigue, and
   hard fighting, before your warfare is accomplished. But let none of
   these things move you. Greater is He that is for you than all they that
   be against you. Everlasting liberty or everlasting captivity are the
   alternatives before you. Choose liberty, and fight to the last.

   (2) It may be you know something of the Christian warfare, and are a
   tried and proved soldier already. If that be your case, accept a
   parting word of advice and encouragement from a fellow-soldier. Let me
   speak to myself as well as to you. Let us stir up our minds by way of
   remembrance. There are some things which we cannot remember too well.

   Let us remember that if we would fight successfully we must put on the
   whole armour of God, and never lay it aside till we die. Not a single
   piece of the armour can be dispensed with. The girdle of truth, the
   breastplate of righteousness, the shield of faith, the sword of the
   Spirit, the helmet of hope--each and all are needful. Not a single day
   can we dispense with any part of this armour. Well says an old veteran
   in Christ's army, who died 200 years ago, "In heaven we shall appear,
   not in armour, but in robes of glory. But here our arms are to be worn
   night and day. We must walk, work, sleep in them, or else we are not
   true soldiers of Christ." (Gurnall's Christian Armour.)

   Let us remember the solemn words of an inspired warrior, who went to
   his rest 1,800 years ago: "No man that warreth entangleth himself with
   the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to
   be a soldier." (2 Tim. ii. 4.) May we never forget that saying!

   Let us remember that some have seemed good soldiers for a little
   season, and talked loudly of what they would do, and yet turned back
   disgracefully in the day of battle.

   Let us never forget Balaam, and Judas, and Demas, and Lot's wife.
   Whatever we are, and however weak, let us be real, genuine, true, and
   sincere.

   Let us remember that the eye of our loving Saviour is upon us, morning,
   noon, and night. He will never suffer us to be tempted above that we
   are able to bear. He can be touched with the feeling of our
   infirmities, for He suffered Himself being tempted. He knows what
   battles and conflicts are, for He Himself was assaulted by the Prince
   of this world. Having such a High Priest, Jesus the Son of God, let us
   hold fast our profession. (Heb. iv. 14.)

   Let us remember that thousands of soldiers before us have fought the
   same battle that we are fighting, and come off more than conquerors
   through Him that loved them. They overcame by the blood of the Lamb;
   and so also may we. Christ's arm is quite as strong as ever, and
   Christ's heart is just as loving as ever. He that saved men and women
   before us is one who never changes. He is "able to save to the
   uttermost all who come unto God by Him." Then let us cast doubts and
   fears away. Let us "follow them who through faith and patience inherit
   the promises," and are waiting for us to join them. (Heb. vii. 25; vi.
   12.)

   Finally, let us remember that the time is short, and the coming of the
   Lord draweth nigh. A few more battles and the last trumpet shall sound,
   and the Prince of Peace shall come to reign on a renewed earth. A few
   more struggles and conflicts, and then we shall bid an eternal good-bye
   to warfare, and to sin, to sorrow, and to death. Then let us fight on
   to the last, and never surrender. Thus saith the Captain of our
   salvation--"He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be
   his God, and he shall be my son." (Rev. xxi. 7.)

   Let me conclude all with the words of John Bunyan, in one of the most
   beautiful parts of Pilgrim's Progress. He is describing the end of one
   of his best and holiest pilgrims:--

   "After this it was noised abroad that Mr. Valiant-for-truth was sent
   for by a summons, by the same party as the others. And he had this word
   for a token that the summons was true, The pitcher was broken at the
   fountain.' (Eccl. xii. 6.) When he understood it, he called for his
   friends, and told them of it. Then said he, I am going to my Father's
   house; and though with great difficulty I have got hither, yet now I do
   not repent me of all the troubles I have been at to arrive where I am.
   My sword I give to him that shall succeed me in my pilgrimage, and my
   courage and skill to him that can get it. My marks and scars I carry
   with me, to be a witness for me that I have fought His battles, who
   will now be my rewarder.' When the day that he must go home was come,
   many accompanied him to the river-side, into which, as he went down, he
   said, O death where is thy sting?' And as he went down deeper, he
   cried, O grave, where is thy victory?' So he passed over, and all the
   trumpets sounded for him on the other side."

   May our end be like this! May we never forget that without fighting
   there can be no holiness while we live, and no crown of glory when we
   die!
     __________________________________________________________________

V.
THE COST

   "Which of you, intending to build a house, sitteth not down first and
   counteth the cost?"--Luke xiv. 28.

   THE text which heads this page is one of great importance. Few are the
   people who are not often obliged to ask themselves--"What does it
   cost?"

   In buying property, in building houses, in furnishing rooms, in forming
   plans, in changing dwellings, in educating children, it is wise and
   prudent to look forward and consider. Many would save themselves much
   sorrow and trouble if they would only remember the question--"What does
   it cost?"

   But there is one subject on which it is specially important to "count
   the cost." That subject is the salvation of our souls. What does it
   cost to be a true Christian? What does it cost to be a really holy man?
   This, after all, is the grand question. For want of thought about this,
   thousands, after seeming to begin well, turn away from the road to
   heaven, and are lost for ever in hell. Let me try to say a few words
   which may throw light on the subject.

   I. I will show, firstly, what it costs to be a true Christian.

   II. I will explain, secondly, why it is of such great importance to
   count the cost.

   III. I will give, in the last place, some hints which may help men to
   count the cost rightly.

   We are living in strange times. Events are hurrying on with singular
   rapidity. We never know "what a day may bring forth"; how much less do
   we know what may happen in a year!--We live in a day of great religious
   profession. Scores of professing Christians in every part of the land
   are expressing a desire for more holiness and a higher degree of
   spiritual life. Yet nothing is more common than to see people receiving
   the Word with joy, and then after two or three years falling away, and
   going back to their sins. They had not considered "what it costs" to be
   a really consistent believer and holy Christian. Surely these are times
   when we ought often to sit down and "count the cost," and to consider
   the state of our souls. We must mind what we are about. If we desire to
   be truly holy, it is a good sign. We may thank God for putting the
   desire into our hearts. But still the cost ought to be counted. No
   doubt Christ's way to eternal life is a way of pleasantness. But it is
   folly to shut our eyes to the fact that His way is narrow, and the
   cross comes before the crown.

   I. I have, first, to show what it costs to be a true Christian.

   Let there be no mistake about my meaning. I am not examining what it
   costs to save a Christian's soul. I know well that it costs nothing
   less than the blood of the Son of God to provide an atonement, and to
   redeem man from hell. The price paid for our redemption was nothing
   less than the death of Jesus Christ on Calvary. We "are bought with a
   price." "Christ gave Himself a ransom for all." (1 Cor. vi. 20; 1 Tim.
   ii. 6.) But all this is wide of the question. The point I want to
   consider is another one altogether. It is what a man must be ready to
   give up if he wishes to be saved. It is the amount of sacrifice a man
   must submit to if he intends to serve Christ. It is in this sense that
   I raise the question, "What does it cost?" And I believe firmly that it
   is a most important one.

   I grant freely that it costs little to be a mere outward Christian. A
   man has only got to attend a place of worship twice on Sunday, and to
   be tolerably moral during the week, and he has gone as far as thousands
   around him ever go in religion. All this is cheap and easy work: it
   entails no self-denial or self-sacrifice. If this is saving
   Christianity, and will take us to heaven when we die, we must alter the
   description of the way of life, and write, "Wide is the gate and broad
   is the way that leads to heaven!"

   But it does cost something to be a real Christian, according to the
   standard of the Bible. There are enemies to be overcome, battles to be
   fought, sacrifices to be made, an Egypt to be forsaken, a wilderness to
   be passed through, a cross to be carried, a race to be run. Conversion
   is not putting a man in an arm-chair and taking him easily to heaven.
   It is the beginning of a mighty conflict, in which it costs much to win
   the victory. Hence arises the unspeakable importance of "counting the
   cost."

   Let me try to show precisely and particularly what it costs to be a
   true Christian. Let us suppose that a man is disposed to take service
   with Christ, and feels drawn and inclined to follow Him. Let us suppose
   that some affliction, or some sudden death, or an awakening sermon, has
   stirred his conscience, and made him feel the value of his soul and
   desire to be a true Christian. No doubt there is everything to
   encourage him. His sins may be freely forgiven, however many and great.
   His heart may be completely changed, however cold and hard. Christ and
   the Holy Spirit, mercy and grace, are all ready for him. But still he
   should count the cost. Let us see particularly, one by one, the things
   that his religion will cost him.

   (1) For one thing, it will cost him his self-righteousness. He must
   cast away all pride and high thoughts, and conceit of his own goodness.
   He must be content to go to heaven as a poor sinner saved only by free
   grace, and owing all to the merit and righteousness of another. He must
   really feel as well as say the Prayer-book words--that he has "erred
   and gone astray like a lost sheep," that he has "left undone the things
   he ought to have done, and done the things he ought not to have done,
   and that there is no health in him." He must be willing to give up all
   trust in his own morality, respectability, praying, Bible-reading,
   church-going, and sacrament-receiving, and to trust in nothing but
   Jesus Christ.

   Now this sounds hard to some. I do not wonder. "Sir," said a godly
   ploughman to the well-known James Hervey, of Weston Favell, "it is
   harder to deny proud self than sinful self. But it is absolutely
   necessary." Let us set down this item first and foremost in our
   account. To be a true Christian it will cost a man his
   self-righteousness.

   (2) For another thing, it will cost a man his sins. He must be willing
   to give up every habit and practice which is wrong in God's sight. He
   must set his face against it, quarrel with it, break off from it, fight
   with it, crucify it, and labour to keep it under, whatever the world
   around him may say or think. He must do this honestly and fairly. There
   must be no separate truce with any special sin which he loves. He must
   count all sins as his deadly enemies, and hate every false way. Whether
   little or great, whether open or secret, all his sins must be
   thoroughly renounced. They may struggle hard with him every day, and
   sometimes almost get the mastery over him. But he must never give way
   to them. He must keep up a perpetual war with his sins. It is
   written--"Cast away from you all your transgressions."--"Break off thy
   sins and iniquities."--"Cease to do evil."--(Ezek. xviii. 31; Daniel
   iv. 27; Isa. i. 16.)

   This also sounds hard. I do not wonder. Our sins are often as dear to
   us as our children: we love them, hug them, cleave to them, and delight
   in them. To part with them is as hard as cutting off a right hand, or
   plucking out a right eye. But it must be done. The parting must come.
   "Though wickedness be sweet in the sinner's mouth, though he hide it
   under his tongue; though he spare it, and forsake it not," yet it must
   be given up, if he wishes to be saved. (Job xx. 12, 13.) He and sin
   must quarrel, if he and God are to be friends. Christ is willing to
   receive any sinners. But He will not receive them if they will stick to
   their sins. Let us set down that item second in our account. To be a
   Christian it will cost a man his sins.

   (3) For another thing, it will cost a man his love of ease. He must
   take pains and trouble, if he means to run a successful race towards
   heaven. He must daily watch and stand on his guard, like a soldier on
   enemy's ground. He must take heed to his behaviour every hour of the
   day, in every company, and in every place, in public as well as in
   private, among strangers as well as at home. He must be careful over
   his time, his tongue, his temper, his thoughts, his imagination, his
   motives, his conduct in every relation of life. He must be diligent
   about his prayers, his Bible-reading, and his use of Sundays, with all
   their means of grace. In attending to these things he may come far
   short of perfection; but there is none of them that he can safely
   neglect. "The soul of the sluggard desireth, and hath nothing: but the
   soul of the diligent shall be made fat." (Prov. xiii. 4.)

   This also sounds hard. There is nothing we naturally dislike so much as
   "trouble" about our religion. We hate trouble. We secretly wish we
   could have a "vicarious" Christianity, and could be good by proxy, and
   have everything done for us. Anything that requires exertion and labour
   is entirely against the grain of our hearts. But the soul can have "no
   gains without pains." Let us set down that item third in our account.
   To be a Christian it will cost a man his love of ease.

   (4) In the last place, it will cost a man the favour of the world. He
   must be content to be thought ill of by man if he pleases God. He must
   count it no strange thing to be mocked, ridiculed, slandered,
   persecuted, and even hated. He must not be surprised to find his
   opinions and practices in religion despised and held up to scorn. He
   must submit to be thought by many a fool, an enthusiast, and a
   fanatic--to have his words perverted and his actions misrepresented. In
   fact, he must not marvel if some call him mad. The Master
   says--"Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not
   greater than his lord. If they have persecuted Me, they will also
   persecute you; if they have kept My saying, they will keep yours also."
   (John xv. 20.)

   I dare say this also sounds hard. We naturally dislike unjust dealing
   and false charges, and think it very hard to be accused without cause.
   We should not be flesh and blood if we did not wish to have the good
   opinion of our neighbours. It is always unpleasant to be spoken
   against, and forsaken, and lied about, and to stand alone. But there is
   no help for it. The cup which our Master drank must be drunk by His
   disciples. They must be "despised and rejected of men." (Isa. liii. 3.)
   Let us set down that item last in our account. To be a Christian it
   will cost a man the favour of the world.

   Such is the account of what it costs to be a true Christian. I grant
   the list is a heavy one. But where is the item that could be removed?
   Bold indeed must that man be who would dare to say that we may keep our
   self-righteousness, our sins, our laziness, and our love of the world,
   and yet be saved!

   I grant it costs much to be a true Christian. But who in his sound
   senses can doubt that it is worth any cost to have the soul saved? When
   the ship is in danger of sinking, the crew think nothing of casting
   overboard the precious cargo. When a limb is mortified, a man will
   submit to any severe operation, and even to amputation, to save life.
   Surely a Christian should be willing to give up anything which stands
   between him and heaven. A religion that costs nothing is worth nothing!
   A cheap Christianity, without a cross, will prove in the end a useless
   Christianity, without a crown.

   II. I have now, in the second place, to explain why "counting the cost"
   is of such great importance to man's soul.

   I might easily settle this question by laying down the principle, that
   no duty enjoined by Christ can ever be neglected without damage. I
   might show how many shut their eyes throughout life to the nature of
   saving religion, and refuse to consider what it really costs to be a
   Christian. I might describe how at last, when life is ebbing away, they
   wake up, and make a few spasmodic efforts to turn to God. I might tell
   you how they find to their amazement that repentance and conversion are
   no such easy matters as they had supposed, and that it costs "a great
   sum" to be a true Christian. They discover that habits of pride and
   sinful indulgence, and love of ease, and worldliness, are not so easily
   laid aside as they had dreamed. And so, after a faint struggle, they
   give up in despair, and leave the world hopeless, graceless, and unfit
   to meet God! They had flattered themselves all their days that religion
   would be easy work when they once took it up seriously. But they open
   their eyes too late, and discover for the first time that they are
   ruined because they never "counted the cost."

   But there is one class of persons to whom especially I wish to address
   myself in handling this part of my subject.. It is a large class--an
   increasing class--and a class which in these days is in peculiar
   danger. Let me in a few plain words try to describe this class. It
   deserves our best attention.

   The persons I speak of are not thoughtless about religion: they think a
   good deal about it. They are not ignorant of religion: they know the
   outlines of it pretty well. But their great defect is that they are not
   "rooted and grounded" in their faith. Too often they have picked up
   their knowledge second hand, from being in religious families, or from
   being trained in religious .ways, but have never worked it out by their
   own inward experience. Too often they have hastily taken up a
   profession of religion under the pressure of circumstances, from
   sentimental feelings, from animal excitement, or from a vague desire to
   do like others around them, but without any solid work of grace in
   their hearts. Persons like these are in a position of immense danger.
   They are precisely those, if Bible examples are worth anything, who
   need to be exhorted "to count the cost."

   For want of "counting the cost" myriads of the children of Israel
   perished miserably in the wilderness between Egypt and Canaan. They
   left Egypt full of zeal and fervour, as if nothing could stop them. But
   when they found dangers and difficulties in the way, their courage soon
   cooled down. They had never reckoned on trouble. They had thought the
   promised land would be all before them in a few days. And so, when
   enemies, privations, hunger, and thirst began to try them, they
   murmured against Moses and God, and would fain have gone back to Egypt.
   In a word, they had "not counted the cost," and so lost everything, and
   died in their sins.

   For want of "counting the cost," many of our Lord Jesus Christ's
   hearers went back after a time, and "walked no more with Him." (John
   vi. 66.) When they first saw His miracles, and heard His preaching,
   they thought "the kingdom of God would immediately appear." They cast
   in their lot with His Apostles, and followed Him without thinking of
   the consequences. But when they found that there were hard doctrines to
   be believed, and hard work to be done, and hard treatment to be borne,
   their fait gave way entirely, and proved to be nothing at all. In a
   word, they had not "counted the cost," and so made shipwreck of their
   profession.

   For want of "counting the cost," King Herod returned to his old sins,
   and destroyed his soul. He liked to hear John the Baptist preach. He
   "observed" and honoured him as a just and holy man. He even "did many
   things" which were right and good. But when he found that he must give
   up his darling Herodias, his religion entirely broke down. He had not
   reckoned on this. He had not "counted the cost." (Mark vi. 20.)

   For want of "counting the cost," Demas forsook the company of St. Paul,
   forsook the Gospel, forsook Christ, forsook heaven. For a long time he
   journeyed with the great Apostle of the Gentiles, and was actually a
   "fellow-labourer." But when he found he could not have the friendship
   of this world as well as the friendship of God, he gave up his
   Christianity and clave to the world. "Demas hath forsaken me," says St.
   Paul, "having loved this present world." (2 Tim. iv. 10.) He had not
   "counted the cost."

   For want of "counting the cost," the hearers of powerful Evangelical
   preachers often come to miserable ends. They are stirred and excited
   into professing what they have not really experienced. They receive the
   Word with a "joy" so extravagant that it almost startles old
   Christians. They run for a time with such zeal and fervour that they
   seem likely to outstrip all others. They talk and work for spiritual
   objects with such enthusiasm that they make older believers feel
   ashamed. But when the novelty and freshness of their feelings is gone,
   a change comes over them. They prove to have been nothing more than
   stony-ground hearers. The description the great Master gives in the
   Parable of the Sower is exactly exemplified. "Temptation or persecution
   arises because of the Word, and they are offended." (Matt. xiii. 21.)
   Little by little their zeal melts away, and their love becomes cold. By
   and by their seats are empty in the assembly of God's people, and they
   are heard of no more among Christians. And why? They had "never counted
   the cost."

   For want of "counting the cost," hundreds of professed converts, under
   religious revivals, go back to the world after a time, and bring
   disgrace on religion. They begin with a sadly mistaken notion of what
   is true Christianity. They fancy it consists in nothing more than a
   so-called "coming to Christ," and having strong inward feelings of joy
   and peace. And so, when they find, after a time, that there is a cross
   to be carried, that our hearts are deceitful, and that there is a busy
   devil always near us, they cool down in disgust, and return to their
   old sins. And why? Because they had really never known what Bible
   Christianity is, They had never learned that we must "count the cost."
   [9]

   For want of "counting the cost," the children of religious parents
   often turn out ill, and bring disgrace on Christianity. Familiar from
   their earliest years with the form and theory of the Gospel--taught
   even from infancy to repeat great leading texts--accustomed every week
   to be instructed in the Gospel, or to instruct others in Sunday
   schools--they often grow up professing a religion without knowing why,
   or without ever having thought seriously about k. And then when the
   realities of grown-up life begin to press upon them, they often astound
   every one by dropping all their religion, and plunging right into the
   world. And why? They had never thoroughly understood the sacrifices
   which Christianity entails. They had never been taught to "count the
   cost."

   These are solemn and painful truths. But they are truths. They all help
   to show the immense importance of the subject I am now considering.
   They all point out the absolute necessity of pressing the subject of
   this paper on all who profess a desire for holiness, and of crying
   aloud in all the churches--"Count the Cost."

   I am bold to say that it would be well if the duty of "counting the
   cost" were more frequently taught than it is. Impatient hurry is the
   order of the day with many religionists. Instantaneous conversions, and
   immediate sensible peace, are the only results they seem to care for
   from the Gospel. Compared with these all other things are thrown into
   the shade. To produce them is the grand end and object, apparently, of
   all their labours. I say without hesitation that such a naked,
   one-sided mode of teaching Christianity is mischievous in the extreme.

   Let no one mistake my meaning. I thoroughly approve of offering men a
   full, free, present, immediate salvation in Christ Jesus. I thoroughly
   approve of urging on man the possibility and the duty of immediate
   instantaneous conversion. In these matters I give place to no one. But
   I do say that these truths ought not to be set before men nakedly,
   singly, and alone. They ought to be told honestly what it is they are
   taking up, if they profess a desire to come out from the world and
   serve Christ. They ought not to be pressed into the ranks of Christ's
   army without being told what the warfare entails. In a word, they
   should be told honestly to "count the cost."

   Does any one ask what our Lord Jesus Christ's practice was in this
   matter? Let him read what St. Luke records. He tells us that on a
   certain occasion "There went great multitudes with Him: and He turned
   and said unto them, If any come to Me, and hate not his father, and
   mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his
   own life also, he cannot be My disciple. And whosoever doth not bear
   his cross and come after Me, cannot be My disciple." (Luke xiv. 25-27.)
   I must plainly say, that I cannot reconcile this passage with the
   proceedings of many modern religious teachers. And yet, to my mind, the
   doctrine of it is as clear as the sun at noon-day. It shows us that we
   ought not to hurry men into professing discipleship, without warning
   them plainly to "count the cost."

   Does any one ask what the practice of the eminent and best preachers of
   the Gospel has been in days gone by? I am bold to say that they have
   all with one mouth borne testimony to the wisdom of our Lord's dealing
   with the multitudes to which I have just referred. Luther, and Latimer,
   and Baxter, and Wesley, and Whitfield, and Berridge, and Rowland Hill,
   were all keenly alive to the deceitfulness of man's heart. They knew
   full well that all is not gold that glitters, that conviction is not
   conversion, that feeling is not faith, that sentiment is not grace,
   that all blossoms do not come to fruit. "Be not deceived," was their
   constant cry. "Consider well what you do. Do not run before you are
   called. Count the cost."

   If we desire to do good, let us never be ashamed of walking in the
   steps of our Lord Jesus Christ. Work hard if you will, and have the
   opportunity, for the souls of others. Press them to consider their
   ways. Compel them with holy violence to come in, to lay down their
   arms, and to yield themselves to God. Offer them salvation, ready,
   free, full, immediate salvation. Press Christ and all His benefits on
   their acceptance. But in all your work tell the truth, and the whole
   truth. Be ashamed to use the vulgar arts of a recruiting serjeant. Do
   not speak only of the uniform, the pay, and the glory; speak also of
   the enemies, the battle, the armour, the watching, the marching, and
   the drill. Do not present only one side of Christianity. Do not keep
   back "the cross" of self-denial that must be carried, when you speak of
   the cross on which Christ died for our redemption. Explain fully what
   Christianity entails. Entreat men to repent and come to Christ; but bid
   them at the same time to "count the cost."

   III. The third and last thing which I propose to do, is to give some
   hints which may help men to "count the cost" rightly.

   Sorry indeed should I be if I did not say something on this branch of
   my subject. I have no wish to discourage any one, or to keep any one
   back from Christ's service. It is my heart's desire to encourage every
   one to go forward and take up the cross. Let us "count the cost" by all
   means, and count it carefully. But let us remember, that if we count
   rightly, and look on all sides, there is nothing that need make us
   afraid.

   Let us mention some things which should always enter into our
   calculations in counting the cost of true Christianity. Set down
   honestly and fairly what you will have to give up and go through, if
   you become Christ's disciple. Leave nothing out. Put it all down. But
   then set down side by side the following sums which I am going to give
   you. Do this fairly and correctly, and I am not afraid for the result.

   (a) Count up and compare, for one thing, the profit and the loss, if
   you are a true-hearted and holy Christian. You may possibly lose
   something in this world, but you will gain the salvation of your
   immortal soul. It is written--"What shall it profit a man, if he shall
   gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" (Mark viii. 36.)

   (b) Count up and compare, for another thing, the praise and the blame,
   if you are a true-hearted and holy Christian. You may possibly be
   blamed by man, but you will have the praise of God the Father, God the
   Son, and God the Holy Ghost. Your blame will come from the lips of a
   few erring, blind, fallible men and women. Your praise will come from
   the King of kings and Judge of all the earth. It is only those whom He
   blesses who are really blessed. It is written--"Blessed are ye when men
   shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against
   you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is
   your reward in heaven." (Matt. v. 11, 12.)

   (c) Count up and compare, for another thing, the friends and the
   enemies, if you are a true-hearted and holy Christian. On the one side
   of you is the enmity of the devil and the wicked. On the other, you
   have the favour and friendship of the Lord Jesus Christ. Your enemies,
   at most, can only bruise your heel. They may rage loudly, and compass
   sea and land to work your ruin; but they cannot destroy you. Your
   Friend is able to save to the uttermost all them that come unto God by
   Him. None shall ever pluck His sheep out of His hand. It is
   written--"Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have
   no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear:
   Fear Him, which after He hath killed hath power to cast into hell; yea,
   I say unto you, fear Him." (Luke xii. 5.)

   (d) Count up and compare, for another thing, the life that now is and
   the life to come, if you are a true-hearted and holy Christian. The
   time present, no doubt, is not a time of ease. It is a time of watching
   and praying, fighting and struggling, believing and working. But it is
   only for a few years. The time future is the season of rest and
   refreshing. Sin shall be cast out. Satan shall be bound. And, best of
   all, it shall be a rest for ever. It is written--"Our light affliction,
   which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and
   eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are
   seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are
   seen are temporal; but the things which arc not seen are eternal." (2
   Cor. iv. 17, 18.)

   (e) Count up and compare, for another thing, the pleasures of sin and
   the happiness of God's service, if you are a true-hearted and holy
   Christian, The pleasures that the worldly man gets by his ways are
   hollow, unreal, and unsatisfying. They are like the fire of thorns,
   flashing and crackling for a few minutes, and then quenched for ever.
   The happiness that Christ gives to His people is something solid,
   lasting, and substantial. It is not dependent on health or
   circumstances. It never leaves a man, even in death. It ends in a crown
   of glory that fadeth not away. It is written--"The joy of the hypocrite
   is but for a moment."--"As the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is
   the laughter of the fool." (Job xx. 5; Eccl. vii. 6.) But it is also
   written--"Peace I leave with you, my peace give I unto you: not as the
   world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither
   let it be afraid." (John xiv. 27.)

   (f) Count up and compare, for another thing, the trouble that true
   Christianity entails, and the troubles that are in store for the wicked
   beyond the grave. Grant for a moment that Bible-reading, and praying,
   and repenting, and believing, and holy living, require pains and
   self-denial. It is all nothing compared to that "wrath to come" which
   is stored up for the impenitent and unbelieving. A single day in hell
   will be worse than a whole life spent in carrying the cross. The "worm
   that never dies, and the fire that is not quenched," are things which
   it passes man's power to conceive fully or describe. It is
   written--"Son, remember that thou in thy life-time receivedst thy good
   things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted and
   thou art tormented." (Luke xvi. 25.)

   (g) Count up and compare, in the last place, the number of those who
   turn from sin and the world and serve Christ, and the number of those
   who forsake Christ and return to the world. On the one side you will
   find thousands--on the other you will find none. Multitudes are every
   year turning out of the broad way and entering the narrow. None who
   really enter the narrow way grow tired ot it and return to the broad.
   The footsteps in the downward road are often to be seen turning out of
   it. The footsteps in the road to heaven are all one way. It is
   written--"The way of the wicked is darkness"--"The way of transgressors
   is hard." (Prov. iv. 19; xiii. 15.) But it is also written--"The path
   of the just is as the shining light, which shineth more and more unto
   the perfect day." (Prov. iv. 8.)

   Such sums as these, no doubt, are often not done correctly. Not a few,
   I am well aware, are ever "halting between two opinions." They cannot
   make up their minds that it is worth while to serve Christ. The losses
   and gains, the advantages and disadvantages, the sorrows and the joys,
   the helps and the hindrances with that faith we shall set things down
   at their true value. Filled with that faith we shall neither add to the
   cross nor subtract from the crown. Our conclusions will be all correct.
   Our sum total will be without error.

   (1) In conclusion, let every reader of this paper think seriously,
   whether his religion costs him anything at present. Very likely it
   costs you nothing. Very probably it neither costs you trouble, nor
   time, nor thought, nor care, nor pains, nor reading, nor praying, nor
   self-denial, nor conflict, nor working, nor labour of any kind. Now
   mark what I say. Such a religion as this will never save your soul. It
   will never give you peace while you live, nor hope while you die. It
   will not support you in the day of affliction, nor cheer you in the
   hour of death. A religion which costs nothing is worth nothing. Awake
   before it is too late. Awake and repent. Awake and be converted. Awake
   and believe. Awake and pray. Rest not till you can give a satisfactory
   answer to my question, "What does it cost?"

   (2) Think, if you want stirring motives for serving God, what it cost
   to provide a salvation for your soul. Think how the Son of God left
   heaven and became Man, suffered on the cross, and lay in the grave, to
   pay your debt to God, and work out for you a complete redemption. Think
   of all this and learn that it is no light matter to possess an immortal
   soul. It is worth while to take some trouble about one's soul.

   Ah, lazy man or woman, is it really come to this, that you will miss
   heaven for lack of trouble? Are you really determined to make shipwreck
   for ever, from mere dislike to exertion? Away with the cowardly,
   unworthy thought. Arise and play the man. Say to yourself, "Whatever it
   may cost, I will, at any rate, strive to enter in at the strait gate."
   Look at the cross of Christ, and take fresh courage. Look forward to
   death, judgment, and eternity, and be in earnest. It may cost much to
   be a Christian, but you may be sure it pays.

   (3) If any reader of this paper really feels that he has counted the
   cost, and taken up the cross, I bid him persevere and press on. I dare
   say you often feel your heart faint, and are sorely tempted to give up
   in despair. Your enemies seem so many, your besetting sins so strong,
   your friends so few, the way so steep and narrow, you hardly know what
   to do. But still I say, persevere and press on.

   The time is very short. A few more years of watching and praying, a few
   more tossings on the sea of this world, a few more deaths and changes,
   a few more winters and summers, and all will be over. We shall have
   fought our last battle, and shall need to fight no more.

   The presence and company of Christ will make amends for all we suffer
   here below. When we see as we have been seen, and look back on the
   journey of life, we shall wonder at our own faintness of heart. We
   shall marvel that we made so much of our cross, and thought so little
   of our crown. We shall marvel that in "counting the cost" we could ever
   doubt on which side the balance of profit lay. Let us take courage. We
   are not far from home. IT MAY COST MUCH TO BE A TRUE CHRISTIAN AND A
   CONSISTENT BELIEVER; BUT IT PAYS.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [9] I should be very sorry indeed if the language I have used above
   about revivals was misunderstood. To prevent this I will offer a few
   remarks by way of explanation. For true revivals of religion no one can
   be more deeply thankful than I am. Wherever they may take place, and by
   whatever agents they may be effected, I desire to bless God for them,
   with all my heart. "If Christ is preached," I rejoice, whoever may be
   the preacher. If souls are saved, I rejoice, by whatever section of the
   Church the word of life has been ministered. But it is a melancholy
   fact that, in a world like this, you cannot have good without evil. I
   have no hesitation in saying, that one consequence of the revival
   movement has been the rise of a theological system which I feel obliged
   to call defective and mischievous in the extreme. The leading feature
   of the theological system I refer to, is this: an extravagant and
   disproportionate magnifying of three points in religion,--viz.,
   instantaneous conversion--the invitation of unconverted sinners to come
   to Christ,--and the possession of inward joy and peace as a test of
   conversion. I repeat that these three grand truths (for truths they
   are) are so incessantly and exclusively brought forward, in some
   quarters, that great harm is done. Instantaneous conversion, no doubt,
   ought to be pressed on people. But surely they ought not to be led to
   suppose that there is no other sort of conversion, and that unless they
   are suddenly and powerfully converted to God, they are not converted at
   all. The duty of coming to Christ at once, "just as we are," should be
   pressed on all hearers. It is the very corner-stone of Gospel
   preaching. But surely men ought to be told to repent as well as to
   believe. They should be told why they are to come to Christ, and what
   they are to come for, and whence their need arises. The nearness of
   peace and comfort in Christ should be proclaimed to men. But surely
   they should be taught that the possession of strong inward joys and
   high frames of mind is not essential to justification, and that there
   may be true faith and true peace without such very triumphant feelings.
   Joy alone is no certain evidence of grace. The defects of the
   theological system I have in view appear to me to be these: (1) The
   work of the Holy Ghost in converting sinners is far too much narrowed
   and confined to one single way. Not all true converts are converted
   instantaneously, like Saul and the Philippian jailor. (2) Sinners are
   not sufficiently instructed about the holiness of God's law, the depth
   of their sinfulness, and the real guilt of sin. To be incessantly
   telling a sinner to "come to Christ" is of little use, unless you tell
   him why he needs to come, and show him fully his sins. (3) Faith is not
   properly explained. In some cases people are taught that mere feeling
   is faith. In others they are taught that if they believe that Christ
   died for sinners they have faith! At this rate the very devils are
   believers! (4) The possession of inward joy and assurance is made
   essential to believing. Yet assurance is certainly not of the essence
   of saving faith. There may be faith when there is no assurance. To
   insist on all believers at once "rejoicing," as soon as they believe,
   is most unsafe. Some, I am quite sure, will rejoice without believing,
   while others will believe who cannot at once rejoice. (5) Last, but not
   least, the sovereignty of God in saving sinners, and the absolute
   necessity of preventing grace, are far too much overlooked. Many talk
   as if conversions could be manufactured at man's pleasure, and as if
   there were no such text as this, "It is not of him that willeth, nor of
   him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy." (Rom. ix. 16.) The
   mischief done by the theological system I refer to is, I am persuaded,
   very great. On the one hand, many humble-minded Christians are totally
   discouraged and daunted. They fancy they have no grace because they
   cannot reach up to the high frames and feelings which are pressed on
   their attention. On the other side, many graceless people are deluded
   into thinking they are "converted," because under the pressure or
   animal excitement and temporary feelings they arc led to profess
   themselves Christians. And all this time the thoughtless and ungodly
   look on with contempt, and rind fresh reasons for neglecting religion
   altogether. The antidotes to the state of things I deplore are plain
   and few. (1) Let "all the counsel of God be taught" in Scriptural
   proportion; and let not two or three precious doctrines of the Gospel
   be allowed to overshadow all other truths. (2) Let repentance be taught
   fully as well as faith, and not thrust completely into the background.
   Our Lord Jesus Christ and St. Paul always taught both. (3) Let the
   variety of the Holy Ghost's works be honestly stated and admitted; and
   while instantaneous conversion is pressed on men, let it not be taught
   as a necessity. (4) Let those who profess to have found immediate
   sensible peace be plainly warned to try themselves well, and to
   remember that feeling is not faith, and that "patient continuance in
   well-doing" is the great proof that faith is true. (John viii. 31.) (5)
   Let the great duty of "counting the cost" be constantly urged on all
   who are disposed to make a religious profession, and let them be
   honestly and fairly told that there is warfare as well as peace, a
   cross as well as a crown, in Christ's service. I am sure that unhealthy
   excitement is above all things to be dreaded In religion, because it
   often ends in fatal, soul-ruining reaction and utter deadness. And when
   multitudes are suddenly brought under the power of religious
   impressions, unhealthy excitement is almost sure to follow. I have not
   much faith in the soundness of conversions when they are said to take
   places in masses and wholesale. It does not seem to me in harmony with
   God's general dealings in this dispensation. To my eyes it appears that
   God's ordinary plan is to call in individuals one by one. Therefore,
   when I hear of large numbers being suddenly converted all at one time,
   I hear of it with less hope than some. The healthiest and most enduring
   success in mission fields is certainly not where natives have come over
   to Christianity in a mass. The most satisfactory and firmest work at
   home does not always appear to me to be the work done in revivals.
   There are two passages of Scripture which I should like to have
   frequently and fully expounded in the present day by all who preach the
   Gospel, and specially by those who have anything to do with revivals.
   One passage is the parable of the sower, That parable is not recorded
   three times over without good reason and a deep meaning.--The other
   passage is our Lord's teaching about "counting the cost," and the words
   which He spoke to the "great multitudes" whom He saw following Him. It
   is very noteworthy that He did not on that occasion say anything to
   flatter these volunteers or encourage them to follow Him. No: He saw
   what their case needed. He told them to stand still and "count the
   cost." (Luke xiv. 25, etc.) I am not sure that some modern preachers
   would have adopted this course of treatment.
     __________________________________________________________________

VI.
GROWTH

   "Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
   Christ."--2 Peter iii. 18.

   THE subject of the text which heads this page is one which I dare not
   omit in this volume about Holiness. It is one that ought to be deeply
   interesting to every true Christian. It naturally raises the questions,
   Do we grow in grace? Do we get on in our religion? Do we make progress?

   To a mere formal Christian I cannot expect the inquiry to seem worth
   attention. The man who has nothing more than a kind of Sunday
   religion--whose Christianity is like his Sunday clothes, put on once a
   week, and then laid aside--such a man cannot, of course, be expected to
   care about "growth in grace." He knows nothing about such matters.
   "They are foolishness to him." (1 Cor. ii. 14.) But to every one who is
   in downright earnest about his soul, and hungers and thirsts after
   spiritual life, the question ought to come home with searching power.
   Do we make progress in our religion? Do we grow?

   The question is one that is always useful, but especially so at certain
   seasons. A Saturday night, a Communion Sunday, the return of a
   birthday, the end of a year--all these are seasons that ought to set us
   thinking, and make us look within. Time is fast flying. Life is fast
   ebbing away. The hour is daily drawing nearer when the reality of our
   Christianity will be tested, and it will be seen whether we have built
   on "the rock" or on "the sand." Surely it becomes us from time to time
   to examine ourselves, and take account of our souls? Do we get on in
   spiritual things? Do we grow?

   The question is one that is of special importance in the present day.
   Crude and strange opinions are floating in men's minds on some points
   of doctrine, and among others on the point of "growth in grace," as an
   essential part of true holiness. By some it is totally denied. By
   others it is explained away, and pared down to nothing. By thousands it
   is misunderstood, and consequently neglected. In a day like this it is
   useful to look fairly in the face the whole subject of Christian
   growth.

   In considering this subject there are three things which I wish to
   bring forward and establish:--

   I. The reality of religious growth. There is such a thing as "growth in
   grace."

   II. The marks of religious growth. There are marks by which "growth in
   grace" may be known.

   III. The means of religious growth. There are means that must be used
   by those who desire "growth in grace."

   I know not who you are, into whose hands this paper may have fallen.
   But I am not ashamed to ask your best attention to its contents.
   Believe me, the subject is no mere matter of speculation and
   controversy. It is an eminently practical subject, if any is in
   religion. It is intimately and inseparably connected with the whole
   question of "sanctification." It is a leading mark of true saints that
   they grow. The spiritual health and prosperity, the spiritual happiness
   and comfort of every true-hearted and holy Christian, are intimately
   connected with the subject of spiritual growth.

   I. The first point I propose to establish is this: There is such a
   thing as growth in grace.

   That any Christian should deny this proposition is at first sight a
   strange and melancholy thing. But it is fair to remember that man's
   understanding is fallen no less than his will. Disagreements about
   doctrines are often nothing more than disagreements about the meaning
   of words. I try to hope that it is so in the present case. I try to
   believe that when I speak of "growth in grace" and maintain it, I mean
   one thing, while my brethren who deny it mean quite another. Let me
   therefore clear the way by explaining what I mean.

   When I speak of "growth in grace," I do not for a moment mean that a
   believer's interest in Christ can grow. I do not mean that he can grow
   in safety, acceptance with God, or security. I do not mean that he can
   ever be more justified, more pardoned, more forgiven, more at peace
   with God, than he is the first moment that he believes. I hold firmly
   that the justification of a believer is a finished, perfect, and
   complete work; and that the weakest saint, though he may not know and
   feel it, is as completely justified as the strongest. I hold firmly
   that our election, calling, and standing in Christ admit of no degrees,
   increase, or diminution. If any one dreams that by "growth in grace" I
   mean growth in. justification he is utterly wide of the mark, and
   utterly mistaken about the whole point I am considering. I would go to
   the stake, God helping me, for the glorious truth, that in the matter
   of justification before God every believer is "complete in Christ."
   (Col. ii. 10.) Nothing can be added to his justification from the
   moment he believes, and nothing taken away.

   When I speak of "growth in grace" I only mean increase in the degree,
   size, strength, vigour, and power of the graces which the Holy Spirit
   plants in a believer's heart. I hold that every one of those graces
   admits of growth, progress, and increase. I hold that repentance,
   faith, hope, love, humility, zeal, courage, and the like, may be little
   or great, strong or weak, vigorous or feeble, and may vary greatly in
   the same man at different periods of his life. When I speak of a man
   "growing in grace," I mean simply this--that1 his sense of sin is
   becoming deeper, his faith stronger, his hope brighter, his love more
   extensive, his spiritual-mindedness more marked. He feels more of the
   power of godliness in his own heart. He manifests more of it in his
   life. He is going on from strength to strength, from faith to faith,
   and from grace to grace. I leave it to others to describe such a man's
   condition by any words they please. For myself I think the truest and
   best account of him is this--he is "growing in grace."

   One principal ground on which I build this doctrine of "growth in
   grace," is the plain language of Scripture. If words in the Bible mean
   anything, there is such a thing as "growth," and believers ought to be
   exhorted to "grow."--What says St. Paul? "Your faith groweth
   exceedingly." (2 Thess. i. 3) "We beseech you that ye increase more and
   more." (1 Thess. iv. 10.) "Increasing in the knowledge of God." (Col. i
   10.) "Having hope, when your faith is increased." (2 Cor. x. 15.) "The
   Lord make you to increase in love." (1 Thess. iii. 12.) "That ye may
   grow up into Him in all things." (Eph. iv. 15.) "I pray that your love
   may abound more and more." (Phil. i. 9.) "We beseech you, as ye have
   received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God, so ye would
   abound more and more." (1 Thess. iv. 1.)--What says St. Peter? "Desire
   the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby." (1 Pet. ii.
   2.) "Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
   Christ." (2 Pet. iii. 18.) I know not what others think of such texts.
   To me they seem to establish the doctrine for which I contend, and to
   be incapable of any other explanation. Growth in grace is taught in the
   Bible. I might stop here and say no more.

   The other ground, however, on which I build the doctrine of "growth in
   grace," is the ground of fact and experience. I ask any honest reader
   of the New Testament whether he cannot see degrees of grace in the New
   Testament saints whose histories are recorded, as plainly as the sun at
   noon-day?--I ask him whether he cannot see in the very same persons as
   great a difference between their faith and knowledge at one time and at
   another, as between the same man's strength when he is an infant and
   when he is a grownup man?--I ask him whether the Scripture does not
   distinctly recognise this in the language it uses, when it speaks of
   "weak" faith and "strong" faith, and of Christians as "new-born babes,"
   "little children," "young men," and "fathers "? (1 Pet. ii. 2; John ii.
   12-14.) I ask him, above all, whether his own observation of believers,
   now-a-days, does not bring him to the same conclusion?--What true
   Christian would not confess that there is as much difference between
   the degree of his own faith and knowledge when he was first converted,
   and his present attainments, as there is between a sapling and a
   full-grown tree? His graces are the same in principle; but they have
   grown. I know not how these facts strike others: to my eyes they seem
   to prove, most unanswerably, that "growth in grace" is a real thing.

   I feel almost ashamed to dwell so long upon this part of my subject. In
   fact, if any man means to say that the faith, and hope, and knowledge,
   and holiness of a newly-converted person, are as strong as those of an
   old-established believer, and need no increase, it is waste of time to
   argue further. No doubt they are as real, but not so strong--as true,
   but not so vigorous--as much seeds of the Spirit's planting, but not
   yet so fruitful. And if any one asks how they are to become stronger, I
   say it must be by the same process by which all things having life
   increase--they must grow. And this is what I mean by "growth in grace."
   [10]

   Let us turn away from the things I have been discussing to a more
   practical view of the great subject before us. I want men to look at
   "growth in grace" as a thing of infinite importance to the soul. I
   believe, whatever others may think, that our best interests are
   concerned in a right view of the question--Do we grow?

   (a) Let us know then that "growth in grace" is the best evidence of
   spiritual health and prosperity. In a child, or a flower, or a tree, we
   are all aware that when there is no growth there is something wrong.
   Healthy life in an animal or vegetable will always show itself by
   progress and increase. It is just the same with our souls. If they are
   progressing and doing well they will grow. [11]

   (b) Let us know, furthermore, that "growth in grace" is one way to be
   happy in our religion. God has wisely linked together our comfort and
   our increase in holiness. He has graciously made it our interest to
   press on and aim high in our Christianity. There is a vast difference
   between the amount of sensible enjoyment which one believer has in his
   religion compared to another. But you may be sure that ordinarily the
   man who feels the most "joy and peace in believing," and has the
   clearest witness of the Spirit in his heart, is the man who grows.

   (c) Let us know, furthermore, that "growth in grace" is one secret of
   usefulness to others. Our influence on others for good depends greatly
   on what they see in us. The children of the world measure Christianity
   quite as much by their eyes as by their ears. The Christian who is
   always at a standstill, to all appearances the same man, with the same
   little faults, and weaknesses, and besetting sins, and petty
   infirmities, is seldom the Christian who does much good. The man who
   shakes and stirs minds, and sets the world thinking, is the believer
   who is continually improving and going forward. Men think there is life
   and reality when they see growth. [12]

   (d) Let us know, furthermore, that "growth in grace" pleases God. It
   may seem a wonderful thing, no doubt, that anything done by such
   creatures as we are can give pleasure to the Most High God. But so it
   is. The Scripture speaks of walking so as to "please God." The
   Scripture says there are sacrifices with which "God is well-pleased."
   (1 Thess. iv. 1; Heb. xiii. 16.) The husbandman loves to see the plants
   on which he has bestowed labour flourishing and bearing fruit. It
   cannot but disappoint and grieve him to see them stunted and standing
   still. Now what does our Lord Himself say? "I am the true vine, and my
   Father is the husbandman."--"Herein is my Father glorified, that ye
   bear much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples." (John xv. 1, 8.) The
   Lord takes pleasure in all His people--but specially in those that
   grow.

   (e) Let us know, above all, that "growth in grace" is not only a thing
   possible, but a thing for which believers are accountable. To tell an
   unconverted man, dead in sins, to "grow in grace" would doubtless be
   absurd. To tell a believer, who is quickened and alive to God, to grow,
   is only summoning him to a plain Scriptural duty. He has a new
   principle within him, and it is a solemn duty not to quench it. Neglect
   of growth robs him of privileges, grieves the Spirit, and makes the
   chariot wheels of his soul move heavily. Whose fault is it, I should
   like to know, if a believer does not grow in grace? The fault, I am
   sure, cannot be laid on God. He delights to "give more grace;" He "hath
   pleasure in the prosperity of His servants." (James iv. 6; Psa. xxxv.
   27.) The fault, no doubt, is our own. We ourselves are to blame, and
   none else, if we do not grow.

   II. The second point I propose to establish is this: There are marks by
   which growth in grace may be known.

   Let me take it for granted that we do not question the reality of
   growth in grace and its vast importance.--So far so good. But you now
   want to know how any one may find out whether he is growing in grace or
   not? I answer that question, in the first place, y observing that we
   are very poor judges of our own condition, and that bystanders often
   know us better than we know ourselves. But I answer further, that there
   are undoubtedly certain great marks and signs of growth in grace, and
   that wherever you see these marks you see a "growing" soul. I will now
   proceed to place some of these marks before you in order.

   (a) One mark of "growth in grace" is increased humility. The man whose
   soul is "growing," feels his own sinfulness and unworthiness more every
   year. He is ready to say with Job, "I am vile,"--and with Abraham, I am
   "dust and ashes,"--and with Jacob, "I am not worthy of the least of all
   Thy mercies,--and with David, "I am a worm,"--and with Isaiah, "I am a
   man of unclean lips,"--and with Peter, "I am a sinful man, O Lord." Job
   xl. 4; Gen. xviii. 27; xxxii. 10; Ps. xxii. 6; Isa. vi. 5; Luke v. 8.)
   The nearer he draws to God, and the more he sees of God's holiness and
   perfection, the more thoroughly is he sensible of his own countless
   imperfections. The further he journeys in the way to heaven, the more
   he understands what St. Paul means when he says, "I am not already
   perfect,"--"I am not meet to be called an Apostle,"--"I am less than
   the least of all saints,"--"I am chief of sinners." (Phil. iii. 12; 1
   Cor. xv. 9; Ephes. iii. 8; 1 Tim. i. 15.) The riper he is for glory,
   the more, like the ripe corn, he hangs down his head. The brighter and
   clearer is his light, the more he sees of the shortcomings and
   infirmities of his own heart. When first converted, he would tell you
   he saw but little of them compared to what he sees now. Would anyone
   know whether he is growing in grace? Be sure that you look within for
   increased humility. [13]

   (b) Another mark of "growth in grace" is increased faith and love
   towards our Lord Jesus Christ. The man whose soul is "growing," finds
   more in Christ to rest upon every year, and rejoices more that he has
   such a Saviour. No doubt he saw much in Him when first he believed. His
   faith laid hold on the atonement of Christ and gave him hope.--But as
   he grows in grace he sees a thousand things in Christ of which at first
   he never dreamed. His love and power--His heart and His intentions--His
   offices as Substitute, Intercessor, Priest, Advocate, Physician,
   Shepherd, and Friend, unfold themselves to a growing soul in an
   unspeakable manner. In short, he discovers a suitableness in Christ to
   the wants of his soul, of which the half was once not known to him.
   Would anyone know if he is growing in grace? Then let him look within
   for increased knowledge of Christ.

   (c) Another mark of "growth in grace" is increased holiness of life and
   conversation. The man whose soul is "growing" gets more dominion over
   sin, the world, and the devil every year. He becomes more careful about
   his temper, his words, and his actions. He is more watchful over his
   conduct in every relation of life. He strives more to be conformed to
   the image of Christ in all things, and to follow Him as his example, as
   well as to trust in Him as his Saviour. He is not content with old
   attainments and former grace. He forgets the things that are behind and
   reaches forth unto those things which are before, making "Higher!"
   "Upward!" "Forward!" "Onward!" his continual motto. (Phil. iii. 13.) On
   earth he thirsts and longs to have a will more entirely in unison with
   God's will. In heaven the chief thing that he looks for, next to the
   presence of Christ, is complete separation from all sin. Would anyone
   know if he is growing in grace? Then let him look within for increased
   holiness. [14]

   (d) Another mark of "growth in grace" is increased spirituality of
   taste and mind. The man whose soul is "growing" takes more interest in
   spiritual things every year. He does not neglect his duty in the world.
   He discharges faithfully, diligently, and conscientiously every
   relation of life, whether at home or abroad. But the things he loves
   best are spiritual things. The ways, and fashions, and amusements, and
   recreations of the world have a continually decreasing place in his
   heart. He does not condemn them as down right sinful, nor say that
   those who have anything to do with them are going to hell. He only
   feels that they have a constantly diminishing hold on his own
   affections, and gradually seem smaller and more trifling in his eyes.
   Spiritual companions, spiritual occupations, spiritual conversation,
   appear of ever-increasing value to him. Would anyone know if he is
   growing in grace? Then let him look within for increasing spirituality
   of taste. [15]

   (e) Another mark of "growth in grace" is increase of charity. The man
   whose soul is "growing" is more full of love every year--of love to all
   men, but especially of love towards the brethren. His love will show
   itself actively in a growing disposition to do kindnesses, to take
   trouble for others, to be good-natured to everybody, to be generous,
   sympathizing, thoughtful, tender-hearted, and considerate. It will show
   itself passively in a growing disposition to be meek and patient toward
   all men, to put up with provocation and not stand upon rights, to bear
   and forbear much rather than quarrel. A growing soul will try to put
   the best construction on other people's conduct, and to believe all
   things and hope all things, even to the end. There is no surer mark of
   backsliding and falling off in grace than an increasing disposition to
   find fault, pick holes, and see weak points in others. Would any one
   know if he is growing in grace? Then let him look within for increasing
   charity.

   (f) One more mark of "growth in grace" is increased zeal and diligence
   in trying to do good to souls. The man who is really "growing" will
   take greater interest in the salvation of sinners every year. Missions
   at home and abroad, efforts to increase religious light and diminish
   religious darkness--all these things will every year have a greater
   place in his attention. He will not become "weary in well-doing"
   because he does not see every effort succeed. He will not care less for
   the progress of Christ's cause on earth as he grows older, though he
   will learn to expect less. He will just work on, whatever the result
   may be--giving, praying, preaching, speaking, visiting, according to
   his position--and count his work its own reward. One of the surest
   marks of spiritual decline is a decreased interest about the souls of
   others and the growth of Christ's kingdom. Would any one know whether
   he is growing in grace? Then let him look within for increased concern
   about the salvation of souls.

   Such are the most trustworthy marks of growth in grace. Let us examine
   them carefully, and consider what we know about them. I can well
   believe that they will not please some professing Christians in the
   present day. Those high-flying religionists, whose only notion of
   Christianity is that of a state of perpetual joy and ecstasy--who tell
   you that they have got far beyond the region of conflict and
   soul-humiliation--such persons no doubt will regard the marks I have
   laid down as "legal," "carnal," and "gendering to bondage." I cannot
   help that. I call no man master in these things. I only wish my
   statements to be tried in the balance of Scripture. And I firmly
   believe that what I have said is not only Scriptural, but agreeable to
   the experience of the most eminent saints in every age. Show me a man
   in whom the six marks I have mentioned can be found. He is the man who
   can give a satisfactory answer to the question, DO WE GROW?

   III. The third and last thing I propose to consider is this:--The means
   that must be used by those who desire to grow in grace. The words of
   St. James must never be forgotten: "Every good gift and every perfect
   gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights." (James
   i. 17.) This is no doubt as true of growth in grace as it is of
   everything else. It is the "gift of God." But still it must always be
   kept in mind that God is pleased to work by means. God has ordained
   means as well as ends. He that would grow in grace must use the means
   of growth. [16]

   This is a point, I fear, which is too much overlooked by believers.
   Many admire growth in grace in others, and wish that they themselves
   were like them. But they seem to suppose that those who grow are what
   they are by some special gift or grant from God, and that as this gift
   is not bestowed on themselves they must be content to sit still. This
   is a grievous delusion, and one against which I desire to testify with
   all my might. I wish it to be distinctly understood that growth in
   grace is bound up with the use of means within the reach of all
   believers, and that, as a general rule, growing souls are what they are
   because they use these means.

   Let me ask the special attention of my readers while I try to set forth
   in order the means of growth. Cast away for ever the vain thought that
   if a believer does not grow in grace it is not his fault. Settle it in
   your mind that a believer, a man quickened by the Spirit, is not a mere
   dead creature, but a being or mighty capacities and responsibilities.
   Let the words of Solomon sink down into your heart: "The soul of the
   diligent shall be made fat." (Prov. xiii. 4.)

   (a) One thing essential to growth in grace is diligence in the use of
   private means of grace. By these I understand such means as a man must
   use by himself alone, and no one can use for him. I include under this
   head private prayer, private reading of the Scriptures, and private
   meditation and self-examination. The man who does not take pains about
   these three things must never expect to grow. Here are the roots of
   true Christianity. Wrong here, a man is wrong all the way through! Here
   is the whole reason why many professing Christians never seem to get
   on. They are careless and slovenly about their private prayers. They
   read their Bibles but little, and with very little heartiness of
   spirit. They give themselves no time for self-inquiry and quiet thought
   about the state of their souls.

   It is useless to conceal from ourselves that the age we live in is full
   of peculiar dangers. It is an age of great activity, and of much hurry,
   bustle, and excitement in religion. Many are "running to and fro," no
   doubt, and "knowledge is increased." (Dan. xii. 4.) Thousands are ready
   enough for public meetings, sermon-hearing, or anything else in which
   there is "sensation." Few appear to remember the absolute necessity of
   making time to "commune with our hearts, and be still." (Psalm iv. 4.)
   But without this there is seldom any deep spiritual prosperity. I
   suspect that English Christians two hundred years ago read their Bibles
   more, and were more frequently alone with God, than they are in the
   present day. Let us remember this point! Private religion must receive
   our first attention, if we wish our souls to grow.

   (b) Another thing which is essential to growth in grace is carefulness
   in the use of public means of grace. By these I understand such means
   as a man has within his reach as a member of Christ's visible Church.
   Under this head I include the ordinances of regular Sunday worship, the
   uniting with God's people in common prayer and praise, the preaching of
   the Word, and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. I firmly believe that
   the manner in which these public means of grace are used has much to
   say to the prosperity of a believer's soul. It is easy to use them in a
   cold and heartless way. The very familiarity of them is apt to make us
   careless. The regular return of the same voice, and the same kind of
   words, and the same ceremonies, is likely to make us sleepy, and
   callous, and unfeeling. Here is a snare into which too many professing
   Christians fall. If we would grow we must be on our guard here. Here is
   a matter in which the Spirit is often grieved and saints take great
   damage. Let us strive to use the old prayers, and sing the old hymns,
   and kneel at the old communion-rail, and hear the old truths preached,
   with as much freshness and appetite as in the year we first believed.
   It is a sign of bad health when a person loses relish for his food; and
   it is a sign of spiritual decline when we lose our appetite for means
   of grace. Whatever we do about public means, let us always do it "with
   our might." (Eccles. ix. 10.) This is the way to grow!

   (c) Another thing essential to growth in grace is watchfulness over our
   conduct in the little matters of everyday life. Our tempers, our
   tongues, the discharge of our several relations of life, our employ
   ment of time--each and all must be vigilantly attended to if we wish
   our souls to prosper. Life is made up of days, and days of hours, and
   the little things of every hour are never so little as to be beneath
   the care of a Christian. When a tree begins to decay at root or heart,
   the mischief is first seen at the extreme end of the little branches.
   "He that despiseth little things," says an uninspired writer, "shall
   fall by little and little." That witness is true. Let others despise
   us, if they like, and call us precise and over-careful. Let us
   patiently hold on our way, remembering that "we serve a precise God,"
   that our Lord's example is to be copied in the least things as well as
   the greatest, and that we must "take up our cross daily" and hourly,
   rather than sin. We must aim to have a Christianity which, like the sap
   of a tree, runs through every twig and leaf of our character, and
   sanctifies all. This is one way to grow!

   (d) Another thing which is essential to growth in grace is caution
   about the company we keep and the friendships we form. Nothing perhaps
   affects a man's character more than the company he keeps. We catch the
   ways and tone of those we live and talk with, and unhappily get harm
   far more easily than good. Disease is infectious, but health is not.
   Now if a professing Christian deliberately chooses to be intimate with
   those who are not friends of God and who cling to the world, his soul
   is sure to take harm. It is hard enough to serve Christ under any
   circumstances in such a world as this. But it is doubly hard to do it
   if we are friends of the thoughtless and ungodly. Mistakes in
   friendship or marriage-engagements are the whole reason why some have
   entirely ceased to grow. "Evil communications corrupt good manners."
   "The friendship of the world is enmity with God." (1 Cor. xv. 33; James
   iv. 4.) Let us seek friends that will stir us up about our prayers, our
   Bible-reading, and our employment of time--about our souls, our
   salvation, and a world to come. Who can tell the good that a friend's
   word in season may do, or the harm that it may stop? This is one way to
   grow. [17]

   (e) There is one more thing which is absolutely essential to growth in
   grace--and that is regular and habitual communion with the Lord Jesus.
   In saying this, let no one suppose for a minute that I am referring to
   the Lord's Supper. I mean nothing of the kind. I mean that daily habit
   of intercourse between the believer and his Saviour, which can only be
   carried on by faith, prayer, and meditation. It is a habit, I fear, of
   which many believers know little. A man may be a believer and have his
   feet on the rock, and yet live far below his privileges. It is possible
   to have "union" with Christ, and yet to have little if any "communion"
   with Him. But, for all that, there is such a thing.

   The names and offices of Christ, as laid down in Scripture, appear to
   me to show unmistakably that this "communion" between the saint and his
   Saviour is not a mere fancy, but a real true thing. Between the
   "Bridegroom" and his bride--between the "Head" and His members--between
   the "Physician" and His patients--between the "Advocate" and His
   clients--between the "Shepherd" and His sheep--between the "Master" and
   His scholars--there is evidently implied a habit of familiar
   intercourse, of daily application for things needed, of daily pouring
   out and unburdening our hearts and minds. Such a habit of dealing with
   Christ is clearly something more than a vague general trust in the work
   that Christ did for sinners. It is getting close to Him, and laying
   hold on Him with confidence, as a loving, personal Friend. Tins is what
   I mean by communion.

   Now I believe that no man will ever grow in grace who does not know
   something experimentally of the habit of "communion." We must not be
   content with a general orthodox knowledge that justification is by
   faith and not by works, and that we put our trust in Christ. We must go
   further than this. We must seek to have personal intimacy with the Lord
   Jesus, and to deal with Him as a man deals with a loving friend. We
   must realize what it is to turn to Him first in every need, to talk to
   Him about every difficulty, to consult Him about every step, to spread
   before Him all our sorrows, to get Him to share in all our joys, to do
   all as in His sight, and to go through every day leaning on and looking
   to Him. This is the way that St. Paul lived: "The life which I now live
   in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God." "To me to live is
   Christ." (Gal. ii. 20; Phil. i. 21.) It is ignorance of this way of
   living that makes so many see no beauty in the book of Canticles. But
   it is the man who lives in this way, who keeps up constant communion
   with Christ--this is the man, I say emphatically, whose soul will grow.

   I leave the subject of growth in grace here. Far more might be said
   about it, if time permitted. But I have said enough, I hope, to
   convince my readers that the subject is one of vast importance.--Let me
   wind up all with some practical applications.

   (1) This book may fall into the hands of some who know nothing whatever
   about growth in grace. They have little or no concern about religion. A
   little proper Sunday church-going or chapel-going makes up the sum and
   substance of their Christianity. They are without spiritual life, and
   of course they cannot at present grow. Are you one of these people? If
   you are, you are in a pitiable condition.

   Years are slipping away and time is flying. Graveyards are filling up
   and families are thinning. Death and judgment are getting nearer to us
   all. And yet you live like one asleep about your soul! What madness!
   What folly! What suicide can be worse than this?

   Awake before it be too late; awake, and arise from the dead, and live
   to God. Turn to Him who is sitting at the right hand of God, to be your
   Saviour and Friend. Turn to Christ, and cry mightily to Him about your
   soul. There is yet hope! He that called Lazarus from the grave is not
   changed. He that commanded the widow's son at Nain to arise from his
   bier can do miracles yet for your soul. Seek Him at once: seek Christ,
   if you would not be lost for ever. Do not stand still talking, and
   meaning, and intending, and wishing, and hoping. Seek Christ that you
   may live, and that living you may grow.

   (2) This book may fall into the hands of some who ought to know
   something of growth in grace, but at present know nothing at all. They
   have made little or no progress since they were first converted. They
   seem to have "settled on their lees." (Zep. i. 12.) They go on from
   year to year content with old grace, old experience, old knowledge, old
   faith, old measure of attainment, old religious expressions, old set
   phrases. Like the Gibeonites, their bread is always mouldy, and their
   shoes are patched and clouted. They never appear to get on. Are you one
   of these people? If you are, you are living far below your privileges
   and responsibilities. It is high time to examine yourself.

   If you have reason to hope that you are a true believer and yet do not
   grow in grace, there must be a fault, and a serious fault somewhere. It
   cannot be the will of God that your soul should stand still. "He giveth
   more grace." He "takes pleasure in the prosperity of His servants."
   (James iv. 6; Ps. xxxv. 27.) It cannot be for your own happiness or
   usefulness that your soul should stand still. Without growth you will
   never rejoice in the Lord. (Phil. iv. 4.) Without growth you will never
   do good to others. Surely this want of growth is a serious matter! It
   should raise in you great searchings of heart. There must be some
   "secret thing." (Job xv. 11.) There must be some cause.

   Take the advice I give you. Resolve this very day that you will find
   out the reason of your standstill condition. Probe with a faithful and
   firm hand every corner of your soul. Search from one end of the camp to
   the other, till you find out the Achan who is weakening your hands.
   Begin with an application to the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Physician
   of souls, and ask Him to heal the secret ailment within you, whatever
   it may be. Begin as if you had never applied to Him before, and ask for
   grace to cut off the right hand and pluck out the right eye. But never,
   never be content, if your soul does not grow. For your peace sake, for
   your usefulness sake, for the honour of your Maker's cause, resolve to
   find out the reason why.

   (3) This book may fall into the hands of some who are really growing in
   grace, but are not aware of it, and will not allow it. Their very
   growth is the reason why they do not see their growth! Their continual
   increase in humility prevents them feeling that they get on. [18] Like
   Moses, when he came down from the mount from communing with God, their
   faces shine. And yet, like Moses, they are not aware of it. (Ex. xxxiv.
   29.) Such Christians, I grant freely, are not common. But here and
   there such are to be found. Like angels' visits, they are few and far
   between. Happy is the neighbourhood where such growing Christians live!
   To meet them and see them and be in their company, is like meeting and
   seeing a bit of "heaven upon earth."

   Now what shall I say to such people? What can I say? What ought I to
   say? Shall I bid them awake to a consciousness of their growth and be
   pleased with it? I will do nothing of the kind.--Shall I tell them to
   plume themselves on their own attainments, and look at their own
   superiority to others? God forbid! I will do nothing of the kind.--To
   tell them such things would do them no good. To tell them such things,
   above all, would be useless waste of time. If there is any one feature
   about a growing soul which specially marks him, it is his deep sense of
   his own unworthiness. He never sees anything to be praised in himself.
   He only feels that he is an unprofitable servant and the chief of
   sinners. It is the righteous, in the picture of the judgment-day, who
   say, "Lord, when saw we Thee an hungred, and fed Thee?" (Matt. xxv.
   37.) Extremes do indeed meet strangely sometimes. The
   conscience-hardened sinner and the eminent saint are in one respect
   singularly alike. Neither of them fully realizes his own condition. The
   one does not see his own sin, nor the other his own grace!

   But shall I say nothing to growing Christians? Is there no word of
   counsel I can address to them? The sum and substance of all that I can
   say is to be found in two sentences: "Go forward!" "Go on!"

   We can never have too much humility, too much faith in Christ, too much
   holiness, too much spirituality of mind, too much charity, too much
   zeal in doing good to others. Then let us be continually forgetting the
   things behind, and reaching forth unto the things before. (Phil. iii.
   13.) The best of Christians in these matters is infinitely below the
   perfect pattern of his Lord. Whatever the world may please to say, we
   may be sure there is no danger of any of us becoming "too good."

   Let us cast to the winds as idle talk the common notion that it is
   possible to be "extreme" and go "too far" in religion. This is a
   favourite He of the devil, and one which he circulates with vast
   industry. No doubt there are enthusiasts and fanatics to be found who
   bring evil report upon Christianity by their extravagances and follies.
   But if any one means to say that a mortal man can be too humble, too
   charitable, too holy, or too diligent in doing good, he must either be
   an infidel or a fool. In serving pleasure and money it is easy to go
   too far. But in following the things which make up true religion, and
   in serving Christ there can be no extreme.

   Let us never measure our religion by that of others, and think we are
   doing enough if we have gone beyond our neighbours. This is another
   snare of the devil. Let us mind our own business. "What is that to
   thee?" said our Master on a certain occasion: "Follow thou Me." (John
   xxi. 22.) Let us follow on, aiming at nothing short of perfection. Let
   us follow on, making Christ's life and character our only pattern and
   example. Let us follow on, remembering daily that at our best we are
   miserable sinners. Let us follow on, and never forget that it signifies
   nothing whether we are better than others or not. At our very best we
   are far worse than we ought to be. There will always be room for
   improvement in us. We shall be debtors to Christ's mercy and grace to
   the very last. Then let us leave off looking at others and comparing
   ourselves with others. We shall find enough to do if we look at our own
   hearts.

   Last, but not least, if we know anything of growth in grace, and desire
   to know more, let us not be surprised if we have to go through much
   trial and affliction in this world. I firmly believe it is the
   experience of nearly all the most eminent saints. Like their blessed
   Master they have been "men of sorrows, acquainted with grief," and
   "perfected through sufferings." (Isa. liii. 3; Heb. ii. 10.) It is a
   striking saying of our Lord, "Every branch in Me that beareth fruit, my
   Father purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit." (John xv. 2.)
   It is a melancholy fact, that constant temporal prosperity, as a
   general rule, is injurious to a believer's soul. We cannot stand it.
   Sickness, and losses, and crosses, and anxieties, and disappointments
   seem absolutely needful to keep us humble, watchful, and
   spiritual-minded. They are as needful as the pruning knife to the vine,
   and the refiner's furnace to the gold. They are not pleasant to flesh
   and blood. We do not like them, and often do not see their meaning. "No
   chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous:
   nevertheless, afterward, it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of
   righteousness." (Heb. xii. 11.) We shall find that all worked for our
   good when we reach heaven. Let these thoughts abide in our minds, if we
   love growth in grace. When days of darkness come upon us, let us not
   count it a strange thing. Rather let us remember that lessons are
   learned on such days which would never have been learned in sunshine.
   Let us say to ourselves, "This also is for my profit, that I may be a
   partaker of God's holiness. It is sent in love. I am in God's best
   school. Correction is instruction. This is meant to make me grow."

   I leave the subject of growth in grace here. I trust I have said enough
   to set some readers thinking about it. All things are growing older:
   the world is growing old; we ourselves are grow-older. A few more
   summers, a few more winters, a few more sicknesses, a few more sorrows,
   a few more weddings, a few more funerals, a few more meetings, and a
   few more partings, and then-- what? Why the grass will be growing over
   our graves!

   Now would it not be well to look within, and put to our souls a simple
   question? In religion, in the things that concern our peace, in the
   great matter of personal holiness, are we getting on? DO WE GROW?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [10] "True grace is progressive, of a spreading, growing nature. It is
   with grace as it is with light: first, there is the day-break; then it
   shines brighter to the full noon-day. The saints are not only compared
   to stars for their light, but to trees for their growth, (Isa. lxi. 3;
   Hos. xiv. 5.) A good Christian is not like Hezekiah's sun that went
   backwards, nor Joshua's sun that stood still, but is always advancing
   in holiness, and increasing with the increase of God."--Thomas Watson,
   Minister of St. Stephen's Walbrook, 1660. (Body of Divinity.)

   [11] "The growth of grace is the best evidence of the truth of grace.
   Things that have not life will not grow. A picture will not grow. A
   stake in a hedge will not grow. But a plant that hath vegetative life
   will grow. The growing of grace shows it to be alive in the soul."--T.
   Watson, 1660.

   [12] "Christian, as ever you would stir up others to exalt the God of
   grace, look to the exercise and improvement of your own graces. When
   poor servants live in a family, and see the faith, and love, and
   wisdom, and patience, and humility of a master, shining like the stars
   in heaven, it draws forth their hearts to bless the Lord that ever they
   came into such a family.--When men's graces shine as Moses' face did,
   when their life, as one speaketh of Joseph's life, is a very heaven,
   sparkling with virtues as so many bright stars, how much others are
   stirred up to glorify God, and cry, These are Christians indeed! these
   are an honour to their God, a crown to their Christ, and a credit to
   their Gospel! Oh, if they were all such, we would be Christians
   too!"--T. Brooks, 1661. (Unsearchable Riches.)

   [13] "The right manner of growth is to grow less in one's own eyes. I
   am a worm and no man.' (Psa. xxii. 6.) The sight of corruption and
   ignorance makes a Christian grow into a dislike of himself. He doth
   vanish in his own eyes. Job abhorred himself in the dust. (Job xlii.
   6.) This is good, to grow out of conceit with oneself."--T. Watson.
   1660.

   [14] "It is a sign of not growing in grace, when we are less troubled
   about sin. Time was when the least sin did grieve us (as the least hair
   makes the eye weep), but now we can digest sin without remorse. Time
   was when a Christian was troubled if he neglected closet prayer; now he
   can omit family prayer. Time was when vain thoughts did not trouble
   him; now he is not troubled for loose practices. There is a sad
   declension in religion; and grace is so far from growing that we can
   hardly perceive its puke to beat."--T. Watson. 1660.

   [15] "If now you would be rich in graces, look to your walking. It is
   not the knowing soul, nor the talking soul, but the close-walking soul,
   the obedient soul, that is rich. Others may be rich in notions, but
   none so rich in spiritual experience, and in all holy and heavenly
   graces, as close-walking Christians."--T. Brooks. 1661. "It is a sign
   of not growing in grace, when we grow more worldly. Perhaps once we
   were mounted into higher orbits, we did set our hearts on things above,
   and speak the language of Canaan. But now our minds are taken off
   heaven, we dig our comforts out of these lower mines, and with Satan
   compass the earth. It is a sign we are going down hill apace, and our
   grace is in a consumption. It is observable when nature decays, and
   people are near dying, they grow more stooping. And truly when men's
   hearts grow more stooping to the earth, and they can hardly lift up
   themselves to an heavenly thought, if grace be not dead, yet it is
   ready to die."--T. Watson. 1660.

   [16] "Experience will tell every Christian that the more strictly, and
   closely, and constantly he walketh with God, the stronger he groweth in
   duty. Infused habits are advantaged by exercise. As the fire that
   kindled the wood for sacrifices upon the altar first came down from
   heaven, but then was to be kept alive by the care and labour of the
   priests, so the habits of spiritual grace are indeed infused from God,
   and must be maintained by daily influences from God, yet with a
   concurrence also of our own labours, in waiting upon God, and
   exercising ourselves with godliness; and the more a Christian doth so
   exercise himself, the more strong he shall grow."--Collinges on
   Providence. 1678.

   [17] "Let them be thy choicest companions, that have made Christ their
   chiefest companion. Do not so much eye the outsides of men as their
   inside: look most to their internal worth. Many persons have their eyes
   upon the external garb of a professor. But give me a Christian that
   minds the internal worth of persons, that makes such as are most filled
   with the fulness of God his choicest and chiefest companions."--T.
   Brooks. 1661.

   [18] "Christians may be growing when they think they do not grow."
   There is that maketh himself poor, yet he is rich.' (Prov. xiii. 7.)
   The sight that Christians have of their defects in grace, and their
   thirst after greater measures of grace, makes them think they do not
   grow. He who covets a great estate, because he hath not so much as he
   desires thinks himself poor."--T. Watson. 1660. "Souls may be rich in
   grace, and yet not know it, not perceive it. The child is heir to a
   crown or a great estate, but knows it not. Moses' face did shine, and
   others saw it, but he perceived it not. So many a precious soul is rich
   in grace, and others see it, and know it, and bless God for it, and yet
   the poor soul perceives it not.--Sometimes this arises from the soul's
   strong desires of spiritual riches. The strength of the soul's desires
   after spiritual riches doth often take away the very sense of growing
   spiritually rich. Many covetous men's desires are so strongly carried
   forth after earthly riches, that though they do grow rich, yet they
   cannot perceive it, they cannot believe it. It is just so with many a
   precious Christian: his desires after spiritual riches are so strong,
   that they take away the very sense of his growing rich in spirituals.
   Many Christians have much worth within them, but they see it not. It
   was a good man that said, The Lord was in this place and I knew it
   not.'--Again, this ariseth sometimes from men neglecting to cast up
   their accounts. Many men thrive and grow rich, and yet, by neglecting
   to cast up their accounts, they cannot tell whether they go forward or
   backward. It is so with many precious souls. Again, this ariseth
   sometimes from the soul's too frequent casting up of its accounts. If a
   man should cast up his accounts once a week, or once a month, he may
   not be able to discern that he doth grow rich, and yet he may grow
   rich. But let him compare one year with another, and he shall clearly
   see that he doth grow rich.--Again, this sometimes ariseth from the
   soul's mistakes in casting up its accounts. The soul many times
   mistakes: it is in a hurry, and then it puts down ten for a hundred,
   and a hundred for a thousand. Look, as hypocrites put down their
   counters for gold, their pence for pounds, and always prize themselves
   above the market, so sincere souls do often put down their pounds for
   pence, their thousands for hundreds, and still prize themselves below
   the market."--Thomas Brooks. 1661. (Unsearchable Riches)
     __________________________________________________________________

VII.
ASSURANCE

   "I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at
   hand."

   "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
   faith:

   "Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
   Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me
   only, but unto all them also that love His appearing."--2 Tim. iv. 6,
   7, 8.

   IN the words of Scripture which head this page, we see the Apostle Paul
   looking three ways--downward, backward, forward; downward to the
   grave--backward to his own ministry--forward to that great day, the day
   of judgment!

   It will do us good to stand by the Apostle's side a few minutes, and
   mark the words he uses. Happy is that soul who can look where Paul
   looked, and then speak as Paul spoke!

   (a) He looks downward to the grave, and he does it without fear. Hear
   what he says:--

   "I am ready to be offered."--I am like an animal brought to the place
   of sacrifice, and bound with cords to the very horns of the altar. The
   drink-offering, which generally accompanies the oblation, is already
   being poured out. The last ceremonies have been gone through. Every
   preparation has been made. It only remains to receive the death-blow,
   and then all is over.

   "The time of my departure is at hand."--I am like a ship about to
   unmoor and put to sea. All on board is ready. I only wait to have the
   moorings cast off that fasten me to the shore, and I shall then set
   sail, and begin my voyage.

   These are remarkable words to come from the lips of a child of Adam
   like ourselves! Death is a solemn thing, and never so much so as when
   we see it close at hand. The grave is a chilling, heart-sickening
   place, and it is vain to pretend it has no terrors. Yet here is a
   mortal man who can look calmly into the narrow "house appointed for all
   living," and say, while he stands upon the brink, "I see it all, and am
   not afraid."

   (b) Let us listen to him again. He looks backward to his ministerial
   life, and he does it without shame. Hear what he says:--

   "I have fought a good fight."--There he speaks as a soldier. I have
   fought that good fight with the world, the flesh, and the devil, from
   which so many shrink and draw back.

   "I have finished my course."--There he speaks as one who has run for a
   prize. I have run the race marked out for me. I have gone over the
   ground appointed for me, however rough and steep. I have not turned
   aside because of difficulties, nor been discouraged by the length of
   the way. I am at last in sight of the goal.

   "I have kept the faith."--There he speaks as a steward. I have held
   fast that glorious Gospel which was committed to my trust. I have not
   mingled it with man's traditions, nor spoiled its simplicity by adding
   my own inventions, nor allowed others to adulterate it without
   withstanding them to the face. "As a soldier --a runner--a steward," he
   seems to say, "I am not ashamed."

   That Christian is happy who, as he quits the world, can leave such
   testimony behind him. A good conscience will save no man--wash away no
   sin--nor lift us one hair's breadth toward heaven. Yet a good
   conscience will be found a pleasant visitor at our bedside in a dying
   hour. There is a fine passage in Pilgrim's Progress which describes Old
   Honest's passage across the river of death. "The river," says Bunyan,
   "at that time overflowed its banks in some places; but Mr. Honest in
   his lifetime had spoken to one Good Conscience to meet him there; the
   which he also did, and lent him his hand, and so helped him over." We
   may be sure there is a mine of truth in that passage.

   (c) Let us hear the Apostle once more. He looks forward to the great
   day of reckoning, and he does it without doubt. Mark his words:--

   "Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
   Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me
   only, but unto all them also that love His appearing."--"A glorious
   reward," he seems to say, "is ready and laid up in store for me--even
   that crown which is only given to the righteous. In the great day of
   judgment the Lord shall give this crown to me, and to all beside me who
   have loved Him as an unseen Saviour, and longed to see Him face to
   face. My work on earth is over. This one thing now remains for me to
   look forward to, and nothing more."

   Let us observe that the Apostle speaks without any hesitation or
   distrust. He regards the crown as a sure thing, as his own already. He
   declares with unfaltering confidence his firm persuasion that the
   righteous Judge will give it to him. Paul was no stranger to all the
   circumstances and accompaniments of that solemn day to which he
   referred. The great white throne--the assembled world--the open
   books--the revealing of all secrets--the listening angels--the awful
   sentence--the eternal separation of the lost and saved--all these were
   things with which he was well acquainted. But none of these things
   moved him. His strong faith overleaped them all, and he only saw Jesus,
   his all-prevailing Advocate, and the blood of sprinkling, and sin
   washed away. "A crown," he says, "is laid up for me." "The Lord Himself
   shall give it to me." He speaks as if he saw it all with his own eyes.

   Such are the main things which these verses contain. Of most of them I
   shall not speak, because I want to confine myself to the special
   subject of this paper. I shall only try to consider one point in the
   passage. That point is the strong "assurance of hope," with which the
   Apostle looks forwards to his own prospects in the day of judgment.

   I shall do this the more readily, because of the great importance which
   attaches to the subject of assurance, and the great neglect with which,
   I humbly conceive, it is often treated in this day.

   But I shall do it at the same time with fear and trembling. I feel that
   I am treading on very difficult ground, and that it is easy to speak
   rashly and unscripturally in this matter. The road between truth and
   error is here especially a narrow pass; and if I shall be enabled to do
   good to some without doing harm to others, I shall be very thankful.

   There are four things I wish to bring forward in speaking of the
   subject of assurance, and it may clear our way if I name them at once.

   I. First, then, I will try to show that an assured hope, such as Paul
   here expresses, is a true and Scriptural thing.

   II. Secondly, I will make this broad concession--that a man may never
   arrive at this assured hope, and yet be saved.

   III. Thirdly, I will give some reasons why an assured hope is
   exceedingly to be desired.

   IV. Lastly, I will try to point out some causes why an assured hope is
   so seldom attained.

   I ask special attention of all who take an interest in the great
   subject of this volume. If I am not greatly mistaken, there is a very
   close connection between true holiness and assurance. Before I close
   this paper I hope to show my readers the nature of that connection. At
   present, I content myself with saying, that where there is the most
   holiness, there is generally the most assurance.

   I. First, then, I will try to show that an assured hope is a true and
   Scriptural thing.

   Assurance, such as Paul expresses in the verses which head this paper,
   is not a mere fancy or feeling. It is not the result of high animal
   spirits, or a sanguine temperament of body. It is a positive gift of
   the Holy Ghost, bestowed without reference to men's bodily frames or
   constitutions, and a gift which every believer in Christ ought to aim
   at and seek after.

   In matters like these, the first question is this--What saith the
   Scripture? I answer that question without the least hesitation. The
   Word of God appears to me to teach distinctly that a believer may
   arrive at an assured confidence with regard to his own salvation.

   I lay it down fully and broadly, as God's truth, that a true Christian,
   a converted man, may reach such a comfortable degree of faith in
   Christ, that in general he shall feel entirely confident as to the
   pardon and safety of his soul--shall seldom be troubled with
   doubts--seldom be distracted with fears--seldom be distressed by
   anxious questionings--and, in short, though vexed by many an inward
   conflict with sin, shall look forward to death without trembling, and
   to judgment without dismay. [19] This, I say, is the doctrine of the
   Bible.

   Such is my account of assurance. I will ask my readers to mark it well.
   I say neither less nor more than I have here laid down.

   Now such a statement as this is often disputed and denied. Many cannot
   see the truth of it at all.

   The Church of Rome denounces assurance in the most unmeasured terms.
   The Council of Trent declares roundly that a "believer's assurance of
   the pardon of his sins is a vain and ungodly confidence;" and Cardinal
   Bellarmine, the well-known champion of Romanism, calls it "a prime
   error of heretics."

   The vast majority of the worldly and thoughtless Christians among
   ourselves oppose the doctrine of assurance. It offends and annoys them
   to hear of it. They do not like others to feel comfortable and sure,
   because they never feel so themselves. Ask them whether their sins are
   forgiven, and they will probably tell you they do not know! That they
   cannot receive the doctrine of assurance is certainly no marvel.

   But there are also some true believers who reject assurance, or shrink
   from it as a doctrine fraught with danger. They consider it borders on
   presumption. They seem to think it a proper humility never to feel
   sure, never to be confident, and to live in a certain degree of doubt
   and suspense about their souls. This is to be regretted, and does much
   harm.

   I frankly allow there are some presumptuous persons who profess to feel
   a confidence for which they have no Scriptural warrant. There are
   always some people who think well of themselves when God thinks ill,
   just as there are some who think ill of themselves when God thinks
   well. There always will be such. There never yet was a Scriptural truth
   without abuses and counterfeits. God's election--man's
   impotence--salvation by grace--all are alike abused. There will be
   fanatics and enthusiasts as long as the world stands. But, for all
   this, assurance is a reality and a true thing; and God's children must
   not let themselves be driven from the use of a truth, merely because it
   is abused. [20]

   My answer to all who deny the existence of real, well-grounded
   assurance, is simply this--What saith the Scripture? If assurance be
   not there, I have not another word to say.

   But does not Job say, "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that He
   shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; and though after my skin
   worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God"? (Job xix.
   26, 26.)

   Does not David say, "Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
   death, I will fear no evil: for Thou art with me; Thy rod and Thy staff
   they comfort me "? (Psalm xxiii. 4.)

   Does not Isaiah say, "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is
   stayed on Thee, because he trusteth in Thee"? (Isaiah xxvi. 3.)

   And again, "The work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of
   righteousness quietness, and assurance for ever." (Isaiah xxxii. 17.)

   Does not Paul say to the Romans, "I am persuaded that neither death,
   nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
   present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
   creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is
   in Christ Jesus our Lord"? (Rom. viii. 38, 39.)

   Does he not say to the Corinthians, "We know that if our earthly house
   of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house
   not made with hands, eternal in the heavens "? (2 Cor. v. 1.)

   And again, "We are always confident, knowing that, whilst we are at
   home in the body, we are absent from the Lord." (2 Cor. v. 6.)

   Does he not say to Timothy, "I know whom I have believed, and am
   persuaded that He is able to keep that which I have committed to Him"?
   (2 Tim. i. 12.)

   And does he not speak to the Colossians of "the full assurance of
   understanding" (Coloss. ii. 2), and to the Hebrews of the "full
   assurance of faith," and the "full assurance of hope"? (Heb. vi. ii; x.
   22.)

   Does not Peter say expressly, "Give diligence to make your calling and
   election sure"? (2 Peter i. 10.)

   Does not John say, "We know that we have passed from death unto life"?
   (1 John iii. 14.)

   And again, "These things have I written unto you that believe on the
   name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life." (1
   John v. 13.)

   And again, "We know that we are of God." (1 John v. 19.)

   What shall we say to these things? I desire to speak with all humility
   on any controverted point. I feel that I am only a poor fallible child
   of Adam myself. But I must say that in the passages I have just quoted
   I see something far higher than the mere "hopes" and "trusts," with
   which so many believers appear content in this day. I see the language
   of persuasion, confidence, knowledge--nay, I may almost say, of
   certainty. And I feel, for my own part, if I may take these Scriptures
   in their plain obvious meaning, the doctrine of assurance is true.

   But my answer, furthermore, to all who dislike the doctrine of
   assurance, as bordering on presumption, is this:--It can hardly be
   presumption to tread in the steps of Peter, and Paul, of Job, and of
   John. They were all eminently humble and lowly-minded men, if ever any
   were; and yet they all speak of their own state with an assured hope.
   Surely this should teach us that deep humility and strong assurance are
   perfectly compatible, and that there is not any necessary connection
   between spiritual confidence and pride. [21]

   My answer, furthermore, is that many have attained to such an assured
   hope as our text expresses, even in modern times. I will not concede
   for a moment that it was a peculiar privilege confined to the Apostolic
   day. There have been in our own land many believers, who have appeared
   to walk in almost uninterrupted fellowship with the Father and the
   Son--who have seemed to enjoy an almost unceasing sense of the light of
   God's reconciled countenance shining down upon them, and have left
   their experience on record. I could mention well-known names, if space
   permitted. The thing has been, and is--and that is enough.

   My answer, lastly, is, It cannot be wrong to feel confidently in a
   matter where God speaks unconditionally--to believe decidedly when God
   promises decidedly--to have a sure persuasion of pardon and peace when
   we rest on the word and oath of Him that never changes. It is an utter
   mistake to suppose that the believer who feels assurance is resting on
   anything he sees in himself. He simply leans on the Mediator of the New
   Covenant, and the Scripture of truth. He believes the Lord Jesus means
   what He says, and takes Him at His word. Assurance after all is no more
   than a full-grown faith; a masculine faith that grasps Christ's promise
   with both hands--a faith that argues like the good centurion, If the
   Lord "speak the word only," I am healed. Wherefore then should I doubt?
   (Matt. viii. 8.) [22]

   We may be sure that Paul was the last man in the world to build his
   assurance on anything of his own. He who could write himself down
   "chief of sinners" (1 Tim. i. 15), had a deep sense of his guilt and
   corruption. But then he had a still deeper sense of the length and
   breadth of Christ's righteousness imputed to him.--He who could cry, "O
   wretched man that I am" (Rom. vii. 24), had a clear view of the
   fountain of evil within his heart. But then he had a still clearer view
   of that other Fountain which can remove "all sin and uncleanness." He
   who thought himself "less than the least of all saints" (Ephes. iii.
   8), had a lively and abiding feeling of his own weakness. But he had a
   still livelier feeling that Christ's promise, "My sheep shall never
   perish" (John x. 28), could not be broken.--Paul knew, if ever man did,
   that he was a poor, frail bark, floating on a stormy ocean. He saw, if
   any did, the rolling waves and roaring tempest by which he was
   surrounded. But then he looked away from self to Jesus, and was not
   afraid. He remembered that anchor within the veil, which is both "sure
   and steadfast." (Heb. vi. 19.) He remembered the word, and work, and
   constant intercession of Him that loved him and gave Himself for him.
   And this it was, and nothing else, that enabled him to say so boldly,
   "A crown is laid up for me, and the Lord shall give it to me;" and to
   conclude so surely, "The Lord will preserve me; I shall never be
   confounded." [23]

   I may not dwell longer on this part of the subject. I think it will be
   allowed I have shown some good ground for the assertion I made, that
   assurance is a true thing.

   II. I pass on to the second thing I spoke of. I said, a believer may
   never arrive at this assured hope, which Paul expresses, and yet be
   saved.

   I grant this most freely. I do not dispute it for a moment. I would not
   desire to make one contrite heart sad that God has not made sad, or to
   discourage one fainting child of God, or to leave the impression that
   men have no part or lot in Christ, except they feel assurance.

   A person may have saving faith in Christ, and yet never enjoy an
   assured hope, such as the Apostle Paul enjoyed. To believe and have a
   glimmering hope of acceptance is one thing; to have "joy and peace" in
   our believing, and abound in hope, is quite another. All God's children
   have faith; not all have assurance. I think this ought never to be
   forgotten.

   I know some great and good men have held a different opinion. I believe
   that many excellent ministers of the Gospel, at whose feet I would
   gladly sit, do not allow the distinction I have stated. But I desire to
   call no man master. I dread as much as any one the idea of healing the
   the wounds of conscience slightly; but I should think any other view
   than that I have given, a most uncomfortable Gospel to preach, and one
   very likely to keep souls back a long time from the gate of life. [24]

   I do not shrink from saying that by grace a man may have sufficient
   faith to flee to Christ; sufficient faith really to lay hold on
   Him--really to trust in Him--really to be a child of God--really to be
   saved; and yet to his last day be never free from much anxiety, doubt,
   and fear.

   "A letter," says an old writer, "may be written, which is not sealed;
   so grace may be written in the heart, yet the Spirit may not set the
   seal of assurance to it.

   A child may be born heir to a great fortune, and yet never be aware of
   his riches; may live childish, die childish, and never know the
   greatness of his possessions. And so also a man may be a babe in
   Christ's family, think as a babe, speak as a babe, and, though saved,
   never enjoy a lively hope, or know the real privileges of his
   inheritance.

   Let no man mistake my meaning when I dwell strongly on the reality,
   privilege, and importance of assurance. Do not do me the injustice to
   say, I teach that none are saved except such as can say with Paul, "I
   know and am persuaded--there is a crown laid up for me." I do not say
   so. I teach nothing of the kind.

   Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ a man must have, beyond all question, if
   he is to be saved. I know no other way of access to the Father. I see
   no intimation of mercy, excepting through Christ. A man must feel his
   sins and lost estate--must come to Jesus for pardon and salvation--must
   rest his hope on Him, and on Him alone. But if he only has faith to do
   this, however weak and feeble that faith may be, I will engage, from
   Scripture warrants, he shall not miss heaven.

   Never, never let us curtail the freeness of the glorious Gospel, or
   clip its fair proportions. Never let us make the gate more strait and
   the way more narrow than pride and the love of sin have made it
   already. The Lord Jesus is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. He does
   not regard the quantity of faith, but the quality: He does not measure
   its degree, but its truth. He will not break any bruised reed, nor
   quench any smoking flax. He will never let it be said that any perished
   at the foot of the cross. "Him that cometh unto Me," He says, "I will
   in no wise cast out." (John vi. 37.) [25]

   Yes! Though a man's faith be no bigger than a grain of mustard seed, if
   it only brings him to Christ, and enables him to touch the hem of His
   garment, he shall be saved--saved as surely as the oldest saint in
   paradise--saved as completely and eternally as Peter, or John, or Paul.
   There are degrees in our sanctification. In our justification there are
   none. What is written, is written, and shall never fail: "Whosoever
   believeth on Him,"--not whosoever has a strong and mighty
   faith--"Whosoever believeth on Him shall not be ashamed." (Rom. x. 11.)

   But all this time, be it remembered, the poor believing soul may have
   no full assurance of his pardon and acceptance with God. He may be
   troubled with fear upon fear, and doubt upon doubt. He may have many an
   inward question, and many an anxiety--many a struggle, and many a
   misgiving--clouds and darkness--storm and tempest to the very end.

   I will engage, I repeat, that bare simple faith in Christ shall save a
   man, though he may never attain to assurance; but I will not engage it
   shall bring him to heaven with strong and abounding consolations. I
   will engage it shall land him safe in harbour; but I will not engage he
   shall enter that harbour in full sail, confident and rejoicing. I shall
   not be surprised if he reaches his desired haven weather-beaten and
   tempest-tossed, scarcely realizing his own safety, till he opens his
   eyes in glory.

   I believe it is of great importance to keep in view this distinction
   between faith and assurance. It explains things which an inquirer in
   religion sometimes finds it hard to understand.

   Faith, let us remember, is the root, and assurance is the flower.
   Doubtless you can never have the flower without the root; but it is no
   less certain you may have the root and not the flower.

   Faith is that poor trembling woman who came behind Jesus in the press,
   and touched the hem of His garment. (Mark v. 25.) Assurance is Stephen
   standing calmly in the midst of his murderers, and saying, "I see the
   heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God."
   (Acts. vii. 56.)

   Faith is the penitent thief, crying, "Lord, remember me." (Luke xxiii.
   42.) Assurance is Job, sitting in the dust, covered with sores, saying,
   "I know that my Redeemer liveth" (Job xix. 25); "Though He slay me, yet
   will I trust Him." (Job xiii. 15.)

   Faith is Peter's drowning cry, as he began to sink: "Lord save, me!"
   (Matt. xiv. 30.) Assurance is that same Peter declaring before the
   Council in after times, "This is the stone which was set at nought of
   you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there
   salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given
   among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts iv. 11, 12.)

   Faith is the anxious, trembling voice, "Lord, I believe: help Thou my
   unbelief." (Mark ix. 24.) Assurance is the confident challenge, "Who
   shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? Who is he that
   condemneth?" (Rom. viii. 33, 34.) Faith is Saul praying in the house of
   Judas at Damascus, sorrowful, blind, and alone. (Acts ix. 11.)
   Assurance is Paul, the aged prisoner, looking calmly into the grave,
   and saying, "I know whom I have believed. There is a crown laid up for
   me." (2 Tim. i. 12; iv. 8.)

   Faith is life. How great the blessing! Who can describe or realize the
   gulf between life and death? "A living dog is better than a dead lion."
   (Eccles. ix. 4.) And yet life may be weak, sickly, unhealthy, painful,
   trying, anxious, weary, burdensome, joyless, smileless to the very end.
   Assurance is more than life. It is health, strength, power, vigour,
   activity, energy, manliness, beauty.

   It is not a question of "saved or not saved," that lies before us, but
   of "privilege or no privilege."--It is not a question of peace or no
   peace, but of great peace or little peace.--It is not a question
   between the wanderers of this world and the school of Christ: it is one
   that belongs only to the school: it is between the first form and the
   last.

   He that has faith does well. Happy should I be, if I thought all
   readers of this paper had it. Blessed, thrice blessed are they that
   believe! They are safe. They are washed. They are justified. They are
   beyond the power of hell. Satan, with all his malice, shall never pluck
   them out of Christ's hand. But he that has assurance does far
   better--sees more, feels more, knows more, enjoys more, has more days
   like those spoken of in Deuteronomy, even "the days of heaven upon the
   earth." (Deut. xi. 21.) [26]

   III. I pass on to the third thing of which I spoke. I will give some
   reasons why an assured hope is exceedingly to be desired.

   I ask special attention to this point. I heartily wish that assurance
   was more sought after than it is. Too many among those who believe
   begin doubting and go on doubting, live doubting and die doubting, and
   go to heaven in a kind of mist.

   It would ill become me to speak in a slighting way of "hopes" and
   "trusts." But I fear many of us sit down content with them, and go no
   further. I should like to see fewer "peradventurers" in the Lord's
   family, and more who could say, "I know and am persuaded." Oh, that all
   believers would covet the best gifts, and not be content with less!
   Many miss the full tide of blessedness the Gospel was meant to convey.
   Many keep themselves in a low and starved condition of soul, while
   their Lord is saying, "Eat and drink abundantly, O beloved." "Ask and
   receive, that your joy may be full." (Cant. v. 1; John xvi. 24.)

   (1) Let us remember then, for one thing, that assurance is to be
   desired, because of the present comfort and peace it affords.

   Doubts and fears have power to spoil much of the happiness of a true
   believer in Christ. Uncertainty and suspense are bad enough in any
   condition--in the matter of our health, our property, our families, our
   affections, our earthly callings--but never so bad as in the affairs of
   our souls. And so long as a believer cannot get beyond "I hope," and "I
   trust," he manifestly feels a degree of uncertainty about his spiritual
   state. The very words imply as much. He says "I hope," because he dares
   not say, "I know."

   Now assurance goes far to set a child of God free from this painful
   kind of bondage, and thus ministers mightily to his comfort. It enables
   him to feel that the great business of life is a settled business, the
   great debt a paid debt, the great disease a healed disease, and the
   great work a finished work; and all other business, diseases, debts,
   and works, are then by comparison small. In this way assurance makes
   him patient in tribulation, calm under bereavements, unmoved in sorrow,
   not afraid of evil tidings, in every condition content, for it gives
   him a fixedness of heart. It sweetens his bitter cups; it lessens the
   burden of his crosses; it smooths the rough places over which he
   travels; it lightens the valley of the shadow of death. It makes him
   always feel that he has something solid beneath his feet and something
   firm under his hands--a sure friend by the way, and a sure home at the
   end. [27]

   Assurance will help a man to bear poverty and loss. It will teach him
   to say, "I know that I have in heaven a better and more enduring
   substance. Silver and gold have I none, but grace and glory are mine,
   and these can never make themselves wings and flee away. Though the fig
   tree shall not blossom, yet I will rejoice in the Lord." (Habak. iii.
   17, 18.)

   Assurance will support a child of God under the heaviest bereavements,
   and assist him to feel "It is well." An assured soul will say, "Though
   beloved ones are taken from me, yet Jesus is the same, and is alive for
   evermore. Christ, being raised from the dead, dieth no more. Though my
   house be not as flesh and blood could wish, yet I have an everlasting
   covenant, ordered in all things and sure." (2 Kings iv. 26; Heb. xiii.
   8; Rom. vi. 9; 2 Sam. xxiii. 5.)

   Assurance will enable a man to praise God, and be thankful, even in
   prison, like Paul and Silas at Philippi. It can give a believer songs
   even in the darkest night, and joy when all things seem going against
   him. [28] (Job xxxv. 10; Psalm xlii. 8.)

   Assurance will enable a man to sleep with the full prospect of death on
   the morrow, like Peter in Herod's dungeon. It will teach him to say, "I
   will both lay me down in peace and sleep, for Thou, Lord, only makest
   me to dwell in safety." (Psalm iv. 8.)

   Assurance can make a man rejoice to suffer shame for Christ's sake, as
   the Apostles did when put in prison at Jerusalem. (Acts v. 41.) It will
   remind him that he may "rejoice and be exceeding glad" (Matt. v. 12),
   and that there is in heaven an exceeding weight of glory that shall
   make amends for all. (2 Cor. iv. 17.)

   Assurance will enable a believer to meet a violent and painful death
   without fear, as Stephen did in the beginning of Christ's Church, and
   as Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Latimer, Rogers, and Taylor did in our own
   land. It will bring to his heart the texts, "Be not afraid of them
   which kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do."
   (Luke xii. 4.) "Lord Jesus receive my spirit." (Acts vii. 59.) [29]

   Assurance will support a man in pain and sickness, make all his bed,
   and smooth down his dying pillow. It will enable him to say, "If my
   earthly house fail, I have a building of God." (2 Cor. v. 1.) "I desire
   to depart and be with Christ." (Phil. i. 23.) "My flesh and my heart
   may fail, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.
   [30] (Psalm lxxiii. 26.)

   The strong consolation which assurance can give in the hour of death is
   a point of great importance. We may depend on it, we shall never think
   assurance so precious as when our turn comes to die. In that awful hour
   there are few believers who do not find out the value and privilege of
   an "assured hope," whatever they may have thought about it during their
   lives. General "hopes" and "trusts" are all very well to live upon
   while the sun shines and the body is strong; but when we come to die,
   we shall want to be able to say, "I know" and "I feel" The river of
   death is a cold stream, and we have to cross it alone. No earthly
   friend can help us. The last enemy, the king of terrors, is a strong
   foe. When our souls are departing, there is no cordial like the strong
   wine of assurance.

   There is a beautiful expression in the Prayer-book service for the
   Visitation of the Sick: "The Almighty Lord, who is a most strong tower
   to all them that put their trust in Him, be now and evermore thy
   defence, and make thee know and feel that there is none other name
   under heaven, through whom thou mayest receive health and salvation,
   but only the name of our Lord Jesus Christ." The compilers of that
   service showed great wisdom there. They saw that when the eyes grow
   dim, and the heart grows faint, and the spirit is on the eve of
   departing, there must then be knowing and feeling what Christ has done
   for us, or else there cannot be perfect peace. [31]

   (2) Let us remember, for another thing, that assurance is to be
   desired, because it tends to make a Christian an active working
   Christian.

   None, generally speaking, do so much for Christ on earth as those who
   enjoy the fullest confidence of a free entrance into heaven, and trust
   not in their own works, but in the finished work of Christ. That sounds
   wonderful, I dare say, but it is true.

   A believer who lacks an assured hope, will spend much of his time in
   inward searchings of heart about his own state. Like a nervous,
   hypochondriacal person, he will be full of his own ailments, his own
   doubtings and questionings, his own conflicts and corruptions. In
   short, you will often find he is so taken up with his internal warfare
   that he has little leisure for other things, and little time to work
   for God.

   But a believer, who has, like Paul, an assured hope, is free from these
   harassing distractions. He does not vex his soul with doubts about his
   own pardon and acceptance. He looks at the everlasting covenant sealed
   with blood, at the finished work, and never-broken word of his Lord and
   Saviour, and therefore counts his salvation a settled thing. And thus
   he is able to give an undivided attention to the work of the Lord, and
   so in the long run to do more. [32]

   Take, for an illustration of this, two English emigrants, and suppose
   them set down side by side in New Zealand or Australia. Give each of
   them a piece of land to clear and cultivate. Let the portions allotted
   to them be the same both in quantity and quality. Secure that land to
   them by every needful legal instrument; let it be conveyed as freehold
   to them and theirs for ever; let the conveyance be publicly registered,
   and the property made sure to them by every deed and security that
   man's ingenuity can devise.

   Suppose then that one of them shall set to work to clear his land and
   bring it into cultivation, and labour at it day after day without
   intermission or cessation.

   Suppose in the meanwhile that the other shall be continually leaving
   his work, and going repeatedly to the public registry to ask whether
   the land really is his own--whether there is not some mistake--whether
   after all there is not some flaw in the legal instruments which
   conveyed it to him.

   The one shall never doubt his title, but just work diligently on. The
   other shall hardly ever feel sure of his title, and spend half his time
   in going to Sydney or Melbourne or Auckland, with needless inquiries
   about it.

   Which now of these two men will have made most progress in a year's
   time? Who will have done the most for his land, got the greatest
   breadth of soil under tillage, have the best crops to show, be
   altogether the most prosperous?

   Any one of common sense can answer that question. I need not supply an
   answer. There can only be one reply. Undivided attention will always
   attain the greatest success.

   It is much the same in the matter of our title to "mansions in the
   skies." None will do so much for the Lord who bought him as the
   believer who sees his title clear, and is not distracted by unbelieving
   doubts, questionings, and hesitations. The joy of the Lord will be that
   man's strength. "Restore unto me," says David, "the joy of Thy
   salvation; then will I teach transgressors Thy ways." (Psalm li. 12.)

   Never were there such working Christians as the Apostles. They seemed
   to live to labour. Christ's work was truly their meat and drink. They
   counted not their lives dear to themselves. They spent and were spent.
   They laid down ease, health, worldly comfort, at the foot of the cross.
   And one grand cause of this, I believe, was their assured hope. They
   were men who could say, "We know that we are of God, and the whole
   world lieth in wickedness." (1 John v. 19.)

   (3) Let us remember, for another thing, that assurance is to be
   desired, because it tends to make a Christian a decided Christian.

   Indecision and doubt about our own state in God's sight is a grievous
   evil, and the mother of many evils. It often produces a wavering and
   unstable walk in following the Lord. Assurance helps to cut many a
   knot, and to make the path of Christian duty clear and plain.

   Many of whom we feel hopes that they are God's children, and have true
   grace, however weak, are continually perplexed with doubts in points of
   practice. "Should we do such and such a thing? shall we give up this
   family custom? Ought we to go into that company? How shall we draw the
   line about visiting? What is to be the measure of our dressing and our
   entertainments? Are we never, under any circumstances, to dance, never
   to touch a card, never to attend parties of pleasure?" These are a kind
   of question which seem to give them constant trouble. And often, very
   often, the simple root of their perplexity is, that they do not feel
   assured they are themselves children of God. They have not yet settled
   the point, which side of the gate they are on. They do not know whether
   they are inside the ark or not.

   That a child of God ought to act in a certain decided way, they quite
   feel; but the grand question is, "Are they children of God themselves?"
   If they only felt they were so, they would go straightforward, and take
   a decided line. But not feeling sure about it, their conscience is for
   ever hesitating and coming to a deadlock. The devil whispers, "Perhaps
   after all you are only a hypocrite: what right have you to take a
   decided course? Wait till you are really a Christian." And this whisper
   too often turns the scale, and leads on to some miserable compromise or
   wretched conformity to the world!

   I believe we have here one chief reason why so many in this day are
   inconsistent, trimming, unsatisfactory, and half-hearted in their
   conduct about the world. Their faith fails. They feel no assurance that
   they are Christ's, and so feel a hesitancy about breaking with the
   world. They shrink from laying aside all the ways of the old man,
   because they are not quite confident they have put on the new. In
   short, I have little doubt that one secret cause of "halting between
   two opinions" is want of assurance. When people can say decidedly, "The
   Lord, He is the God," their course becomes very clear. (1 Kings xviii.
   39.)

   (4) Let us remember, finally, that assurance is to be desired, because
   it tends to make the holiest Christians.

   This, too, sounds wonderful and strange, and yet it is true. It is one
   of the paradoxes of the Gospel, contrary at first sight to reason and
   common sense, and yet it is a fact. Cardinal Bellarmine was seldom more
   wide of the truth than when he said, "Assurance tends to carelessness
   and sloth." He that is freely forgiven by Christ will always do much
   for Christ's glory, and he that enjoys the fullest assurance of this
   forgiveness will ordinarily keep up the closest walk with God. It is a
   faithful saying and worthy to be remembered by all believers, "He that
   hath this hope in Him purifieth himself, even as He is pure." (1 John
   iii. 3.) A hope that does not purify is a mockery, a delusion, and a
   snare. [33]

   None are so likely to maintain a watchful guard over their own hearts
   and lives as those who know the comfort of living in close communion
   with God. They feel their privilege, and will fear losing it. They will
   dread falling from the high estate, and marring their own comforts, by
   bringing clouds between themselves and Christ. He that goes on a
   journey with little money about him takes little thought of danger, and
   cares little how late he travels. He, on the contrary, that carries
   gold and jewels will be a cautious traveller. He will look well to his
   roads, his lodgings, and his company, and run no risks. It is an old
   saying, however unscientific it may be, that the fixed stars are those
   which tremble most. The man that most fully enjoys the light of God's
   reconciled countenance, will be a man tremblingly afraid of losing its
   blessed consolations, and jealously fearful of doing anything to grieve
   the Holy Ghost.

   I commend these four points to the serious consideration of all
   professing Christians. Would you like to feel the Everlasting Arms
   around you, and to hear the voice of Jesus daily drawing nigh to your
   soul, and saying, "I am thy salvation"?--Would you like to be a useful
   labourer in the vineyard in your day and generation?--Would you be
   known of all men as a bold, firm, decided, single-eyed, uncompromising
   follower of Christ?--Would you be eminently spiritually-minded and
   holy?--I doubt not some readers will say, "These are the very things
   our hearts desire. We long for them. We pant after them: but they seem
   far from us."

   Now, has it never struck you that your neglect of assurance may
   possibly be the main secret of all your failures--that the low measure
   of faith which satisfies you may be the cause of your low degree of
   peace? Can you think it a strange thing that your graces are faint and
   languishing, when faith, the root and mother of them all, is allowed to
   remain feeble and weak?

   Take my advice this day. Seek an increase of faith. Seek an assured
   hope of salvation like the Apostle Paul's. Seek to obtain a simple,
   childlike confidence in God's promises. Seek to be able to say with
   Paul, "I know whom I have believed: I am persuaded that He is mine, and
   I am His."

   You have very likely tried other ways and methods and completely
   failed. Change your plan. Go upon another tack. Lay aside your doubts.
   Lean more entirely on the Lord's arm. Begin with implicit trusting.
   Cast aside your faithless backwardness to take the Lord at His word.
   Come and roll yourself, your soul, and your sins, upon your gracious
   Saviour. Begin with simple believing, and all other things shall soon
   be added to you. [34]

   IV. I come now to the last thing of which I spoke. I promised to point
   out some probable causes why an assured hope is so seldom attained. I
   will do it very shortly.

   This is a very serious question, and ought to raise in all of us great
   searchings of heart. Few, certainly, of Christ's people seem to reach
   up to this blessed spirit of assurance. Many comparatively believe, but
   few are persuaded. Many comparatively have saving faith, but few that
   glorious confidence which shines forth in the language of St. Paul.
   That such is the case, I think we must all allow.

   Now, why is this so?--Why is a thing which two Apostles have strongly
   enjoined us to seek after, a thing of which few believers have any
   experimental knowledge in these fitter days? Why is an assured hope so
   rare?

   I desire to offer a few suggestions on this point, with all humility. I
   know that many have never attained assurance, at whose feet I would
   gladly sit both in earth and heaven. Perhaps the Lord sees something in
   the natural temperament of some of His children, which makes assurance
   not good for them. Perhaps, in order to be kept in spiritual health,
   they need to be kept very low. God only knows. Still, after every
   allowance, I fear there are many believers without an assured hope,
   whose case may too often be explained by causes such as these.

   (1) One most common cause, I suspect, is a defective view of the
   doctrine of justification.

   I am inclined to think that justification and sanctification are
   insensibly confused together in the minds of many believers. They
   receive the Gospel truth--that there must be something done in us, as
   well as something done for us, if we are true members of Christ: and so
   far they are right. But then, without being aware of it, perhaps, they
   seem to imbibe the idea that their justification is, in some degree,
   affected by something within themselves. They do not clearly see that
   Christ's work, not their own work--either in whole or in part, either
   directly or indirectly--is alone the ground of our acceptance with God;
   that justification is a thing entirely without us, for which nothing
   whatever is needful on our part but simple faith--and that the weakest
   believer is as fully and completely justified as the strongest. [35]

   Many appear to forget that we are saved and justified as sinners, and
   only sinners; and that we never can attain to anything higher, if we
   live to the age of Methuselah. Redeemed sinners, justified sinners, and
   renewed sinners doubtless we must be--but sinners, sinners, sinners, we
   shall be always to the very last. They do not seem to comprehend that
   there is a wide difference between our justification and our
   sanctification. Our justification is a perfect finished work, and
   admits of no degrees. Our sanctification is imperfect and incomplete,
   and will be so to the last hour of our life. They appear to expect that
   a believer may at some period of his life be in a measure free from
   corruption, and attain to a kind of inward perfection. And not finding
   this angelic state of things in their own hearts, they at once conclude
   there must be something very wrong in their state. And so they go
   mourning all their days--oppressed with fears that they have no part or
   lot in Christ, and refusing to be comforted.

   Let us weigh this point well. If any believing soul desires assurance,
   and has not got it, let him ask himself, first of all, if he is quite
   sure he is sound in the faith, if he knows how to distinguish things
   that differ, and if his eyes are thoroughly clear in the matter of
   justification. He must know what it is simply to believe and to be
   justified by faith before he can expect to feel assured.

   In this matter, as well as in many others, the old Galatian heresy is
   the most fertile source of error, both in doctrine and in practice.
   People ought to seek clearer views of Christ, and what Christ has done
   for them. Happy is the man who really understands "justification by
   faith without the deeds of the law."

   (2) Another common cause of the absence of assurance is, slothfulness
   about growth in grace.

   I suspect many true believers hold dangerous and unscriptural views on
   this point; I do not of course mean intentionally, but they do hold
   them. Many appear to think that, once converted, they have little more
   to attend to, and that a state of salvation is a kind of easy chair, in
   which they may just sit still, lie back, and be happy. They seem to
   fancy that grace is given them that they may enjoy it, and they forget
   that it is given, like a talent, to be used, employed, and improved.
   Such persons lose sight of the many direct injunctions "to increase--to
   grow--to abound more and more--to add to our faith," and the like; and
   in this little-doing condition, this sitting-still state of mind, I
   never marvel that they miss assurance.

   I believe it ought to be our continual aim and desire to go forward,
   and our watchword on every returning birthday, and at the beginning of
   every year, should be, "More and more" (1 Thess. iv. 1): more
   knowledge--more faith--more obedience--more love. If we have brought
   forth thirtyfold, we should seek to bring forth sixty; and if we have
   brought forth sixty, we should strive to bring forth a hundred. The
   will of the Lord is our sanctification, and it ought to be our will
   too. (Matt. xiii. 23; 1 Thess. iv. 3.)

   One thing, at all events, we may depend upon--there is an inseparable
   connection between diligence and assurance. "Give diligence" says
   Peter, "to make your calling and election sure." (2 Peter i. 10.) "We
   desire," says Paul, "that every one of you do show the same diligence
   to the full assurance of hope unto the end." (Heb. vi. 11.) "The soul
   of the diligent," says Solomon, "shall be made fat." (Prov. xiii. 4.)
   There is much truth in the old maxim of the Puritans: "Faith of
   adherence comes by hearing, but faith of assurance comes not without
   doing."

   Is any reader of this paper one of those who desires assurance, but has
   not got it? Mark my words. You will never get it without diligence,
   however much you may desire it. There are no gains without pains in
   spiritual things, any more than in temporal. "The soul of the sluggard
   desireth and hath nothing." (Prov. xiii. 4.) [36]

   (3) Another common cause of a want of assurance is an inconsistent walk
   in life.

   With grief and sorrow I feel constrained to say that I fear nothing
   more frequently prevents men attaining an assured hope than this. The
   stream of professing Christianity in this day is far wider than it
   formerly was, and I am afraid we must admit at the same time it is much
   less deep.

   Inconsistency of life is utterly destructive of peace of conscience.
   The two things are incompatible. They cannot and they will not go
   together. If you will have your besetting sins, and cannot make up your
   minds to give them up--if you will shrink from cutting off the right
   hand and plucking out the right eye when occasion requires it--I will
   engage you will have no assurance.

   A vacillating walk--a backwardness to take a bold and decided line--a
   readiness to conform to the world--a hesitating witness for Christ--a
   lingering tone of religion--a flinching from a high standard of
   holiness and spiritual life--all these make up a sure receipt for
   bringing a blight upon the garden of your soul.

   It is vain to suppose you will feel assured and persuaded of your own
   pardon and acceptance with God, unless you count all God's commandments
   concerning all things to be right, and hate every sin, whether great or
   small. (Psalm cxix. 128.) One Achan allowed in the camp of your heart
   will weaken your hands and lay your consolations low in the dust. You
   must be daily sowing to the Spirit, if you are to reap the witness of
   the Spirit. You will not find and feel that all the Lord's ways are
   ways of pleasantness, unless you labour in all your ways to please the
   Lord. [37]

   I bless God that our salvation in no wise depends on our own works. By
   grace we are saved--not by works of righteousness--through
   faith--without the deeds of the law. But I never would have any
   believer for a moment forget that our sense of salvation depends much
   on the manner of our living. Inconsistency will dim our eyes, and bring
   clouds between us and the sun. The sun is the same behind the clouds,
   but you will not be able to see its brightness or enjoy its warmth, and
   your soul will be gloomy and cold. It is in the path of well doing that
   the day-spring of assurance will visit you, and shine down upon your
   heart.

   "The secret of the Lord," says David, "is with them that fear Him, and
   He will show them His covenant." (Psalm xxv. 14.)

   "To him that ordereth his conversation aright, will I show the
   salvation of God." (Psalm l. 23.)

   "Great peace have they which love Thy law, and nothing shall offend
   them." (Psalm cxix. 165.)

   "If we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have fellowship one
   with another." (1 John i. 7.)

   "Let us not love in word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth;
   and hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our
   hearts before Him." (1 John iii. 18, 19.)

   "Hereby we do know that we know Him, if we keep His commandments." (1
   John ii. 3.)

   Paul was a man who exercised himself to have always a conscience void
   of offence toward God and toward man. (Acts xxiv. 16.) He could say
   with boldness, "I have fought the good fight, I have kept the faith." I
   do not therefore wonder that the Lord enabled him to add with
   confidence, "Henceforth there is a crown laid up for me, and the Lord
   shall give it me at that day."

   If any believer in the Lord Jesus desires assurance, and has not got
   it, let him think over this point also. Let him look at his own heart,
   look at his own conscience, look at his own life, look at his own ways,
   look at his own home. And perhaps when he has done that, he will be
   able to say, "There is a cause why I have no assured hope."

   I leave the three matters I have just mentioned to the private
   consideration of every reader of this paper. I am sure they are worth
   examining. May we examine them honestly. And may the Lord give us
   understanding in all things.

   (1) And now in closing this important inquiry, let me speak first to
   those readers who have not yet given themselves to the Lord, who have
   not yet come out from the world, chosen the good part, and followed
   Christ.

   I ask you then to learn from this subject, the privileges and comforts
   of a true Christian.

   I would not have you judge of the Lord Jesus Christ by His people. The
   best of servants can give you but a faint idea of that glorious Master.
   Neither would I have you judge of the privileges of His kingdom, by the
   measure of comfort to which many of His people attain. Alas, we are
   most of us poor creatures! We come short, very short, of the
   blessedness we might enjoy. But, depend upon it, there are glorious
   things in the city of our God, which they who have an assured hope
   taste, even in their lifetime. There are lengths and breadths of peace
   and consolation there, which it has not entered into your heart to
   conceive. There is bread enough and to spare in our Father's house,
   though many of us certainly eat but little of it, and continue weak.
   But the fault must not be laid to our Master's charge: it is all our
   own.

   And, after all, the weakest child of God has a mine of comforts within
   him, of which you know nothing. You see the conflicts and tossings of
   the surface of his heart, but you see not the pearls of great price
   which are hidden in the depths below. The feeblest member of Christ
   would not change conditions with you. The believer who possesses the
   least assurance is far better off than you are. He has a hope, however
   faint, but you have none at all. He has a portion that will never be
   taken from him, a Saviour that will never be taken from him, a Saviour
   that will never forsake him, a treasure that fadeth not away, however
   little he may realize it all at present. But, as for you, if you die as
   you are, your expectations will all perish. Oh, that you were wise! Oh,
   that you understood these things! Oh, that you would consider your
   latter end!

   I feel deeply for you in these latter days of the world, if I ever did.
   I feel deeply for those whose treasure is all on earth, and whose hopes
   are all on this side of the grave. Yes! when I see old kingdoms and
   dynasties shaking to the very foundation--when I see, as we all saw a
   few years ago, kings and princes and rich men and great men fleeing for
   their fives, and scarce knowing where to hide their heads--when I see
   property dependent on public confidence melting like snow in the
   spring, and public stocks and funds losing their value--when I see
   these things, I feel deeply for those who have no better portion than
   this world can give them, and no place in that kingdom which cannot be
   removed. [38]

   Take advice of a minister of Christ this very day. Seek durable
   riches--a treasure that cannot be taken from you--a city which hath
   lasting foundations. Do as the Apostle Paul did. Give yourself to the
   Lord Jesus Christ, and seek that incorruptible crown He is ready to
   bestow. Take His yoke upon you, and learn of Him. Come away from a
   world which will never really satisfy you, and from sin which will bite
   like a serpent, if you cleave to it, at last. Come to the Lord Jesus as
   lowly sinners, and He will receive you, pardon you, give you His
   renewing Spirit, fill you with peace. This shall give you more real
   comfort than the world has ever done. There is a gulf in your heart
   which nothing but the peace of Christ can fill. Enter in and share our
   privileges. Come with us, and sit down by our side.

   (2) Lastly, let me turn to all believers who read these pages, and
   speak to them a few words of brotherly counsel.

   The main thing that I urge upon you is this--if you have not got an
   assured hope of your own acceptance in Christ, resolve this day to seek
   it. Labour for it. Strive after it. Pray for it. Give the Lord no rest
   till you "know whom you have believed."

   I feel, indeed, that the small amount of assurance in this day, among
   those who are reckoned God's children, is a shame and a reproach. "It
   is a thing to be heavily bewailed," says old Traill, "that many
   Christians have lived twenty or forty years since Christ called them by
   His grace, yet doubting in their life." Let us call to mind the earnest
   "desire" Paul expresses, that "every one" of the Hebrews should seek
   after full assurance; and let us endeavour, by God's blessing, to roll
   this reproach away. (Heb. vi. 11.)

   Believing reader, do you really mean to say that you have no desire to
   exchange hope for confidence, trust for persuasion, uncertainty for
   knowledge? Because weak faith will save you, will you therefore rest
   content with it? Because assurance is not essential to your entrance
   into heaven, will you therefore be satisfied without it upon earth?
   Alas, this is not a healthy state of soul to be in; this is not the
   mind of the Apostolic day! Arise at once and go forward. Stick not at
   the foundations of religion: go on to perfection. Be not content with a
   day of small things. Never despise it in others, but never be content
   with it yourself.

   Believe me, believe me, assurance is worth the seeking. You forsake
   your own mercies when you rest content without it. The things I speak
   are for your peace. If it is good to be sure in earthly things, how
   much better is it to be sure in heavenly things! Your salvation is a
   fixed and certain thing. God knows it. Why should not you seek to know
   it too? There is nothing unscriptural in this. Paul never saw the Book
   of Life, and yet Paul says, "I know and am persuaded."

   Make it then your daily prayer that you may have an increase of faith.
   According to your faith will be your peace. Cultivate that blessed root
   more, and sooner or later, by God's blessing, you may hope to have the
   flower. You may not perhaps attain to full assurance all at once. It is
   good sometimes to be kept waiting: we do not value things which we get
   without trouble. But though it tarry, wait for it. Seek on, and expect
   to find.

   There is one thing, however, of which I would not have you
   ignorant:--You must not be surprised if you have occasional doubts,
   after you have got assurance. You must not forget you are on earth, and
   not in heaven. You are still in the body, and have indwelling sin: the
   flesh will lust against the spirit to the very end. The leprosy will
   never be out of the walls of the old house till death takes it down.
   And there is a devil, too, and a strong devil: a devil who tempted the
   Lord Jesus, and gave Peter a fall; and he will take care you know it.
   Some doubts there always will be. He that never doubts has nothing to
   lose. He that never fears possesses nothing truly valuable. He that is
   never jealous knows little of deep love. Be not discouraged: you shall
   be more than conqueror through Him that loved you. [39]

   Finally, do not forget that assurance is a thing which may be lost for
   a season, even by the brightest Christians, unless they take care.

   Assurance is a most delicate plant. It needs daily, hourly watching,
   watering, tending, cherishing. So watch and pray the more when you have
   got it. As Rutherford says, "Make much of assurance." Be always upon
   your guard. When Christian slept in the arbour, in Pilgrim's Progress,
   he lost his certificate. Keep that in mind.

   David lost assurance for many months by falling into transgression.
   Peter lost it when he denied his Lord. Each found it again undoubtedly,
   but not till after bitter tears. Spiritual darkness comes on horseback,
   and goes away on foot. It is upon us before we know that it is coming.
   It leaves us slowly, gradually, and not till after many days. It is
   easy to run down hill. It is hard work to climb up. So remember my
   caution--when you have the joy of the Lord, watch and pray.

   Above all, grieve not the Spirit. Quench not the Spirit. Vex not the
   Spirit. Drive Him not to a distance, by tampering with small bad habits
   and little sins. Little jarrings between husbands and wives make
   unhappy homes, and petty inconsistencies, known and allowed, will bring
   in a strangeness between you and the Spirit.

   Hear the conclusion of the whole matter.

   The man who walks with God in Christ most closely will generally be
   kept in the greatest peace.

   The believer who follows the Lord most fully and aims at the highest
   degree of holiness will ordinarily enjoy the most assured hope, and
   have the clearest persuasion of his own salvation.

  NOTE

   (referred to at page 107)

   Extracts from English Divines, showing that there is a difference
   between faith and assurance--that a believer may be justified and
   accepted with God, and yet not enjoy a comfortable knowledge and
   persuasion of his own safety--and that the weakest faith in Christ, if
   it be true, will save a man as surely as the strongest.

   (1) "The mercy of God is greater than all the sins in the world. But we
   sometimes are in such a case, that we think we have no faith at all; or
   if we have any, it is very feeble and weak. And therefore these are two
   things: to have faith, and to have the feeling of faith. For some men
   would fain have the feeling of faith, but they cannot attain unto it;
   and yet they must not despair, but go forward in calling upon God, and
   it will come at the length: God will open their hearts, and let them
   feel His goodness."--Bishop Larimer's Sermons. 1552.

   (2) "Weak faith may fail in the applying, or in the apprehension and
   appropriating of Christ's benefits to a man's own self. This is to be
   seen in ordinary experience. For many a man there is of humble and
   contrite heart, that serveth God in spirit and truth, yet is not able
   to say, without great doublings and waverings, I know and am fully
   assured that my sins are pardoned. Now shall we say that all such are
   without faith? God forbid.

   "This weak faith will as truly apprehend God's merciful promises for
   the pardon of sin as strong faith, though not so soundly. Even as a man
   with a palsied hand can stretch it out as well to receive a gift at the
   hand of a king as he that is more sound, though it may be not so firmly
   and steadfastly."--Exposition of the Creed, by William Perkins,
   Minister of Christ in the University of Cambridge. 1612.

   (3) "This certainty of our salvation, spoken of by Paul, rehearsed by
   Peter, and mentioned by David (Psalm iv. 7), is that special fruit of
   faith, which breedeth spiritual joy and inward peace, which passeth all
   understanding. True it is, all God's children have it not. One thing is
   the tree, and another thing is the fruit of the tree: one thing is
   faith, and another thing is the fruit of faith. And that remnant of
   God's elect which feel the want of this faith, have notwithstanding
   faith."--Sermons by Richard Greenham, Minister and Preacher of the Word
   of God. 1612.

   (4) "Some think they have no faith at all, because they have no full
   assurance. Yet the fairest fire that can be will have some smoke."--The
   Bruised Reed, by Richard Sibbes, Master of Catherine Hall, Cambridge,
   and Preacher of Gray's Inn, London. 1630.

   (5) "The act of faith is to apply Christ to the soul; and this the
   weakest faith can do as well as the strongest, if it be true. A child
   can hold a staff as well, though not so strongly, as a man. The
   prisoner through a hole sees the sun, though not so perfectly as they
   in the open air. They that saw the brazen serpent, though a great way
   off, yet were healed.

   "The least faith is as precious to the believer's soul as Peter's or
   Paul's faith was to themselves; for it lays hold upon Christ and brings
   eternal salvation."--An Exposition of the Second Epistle General of
   Peter, by the Rev. Thomas Adams, Rector of St. Gregory's, London. 1633.

   (6) "Weak faith is true faith--as precious, though not so great as
   strong faith: the same Holy Ghost the author, the same Gospel the
   instrument.

   "If it never proves great, yet weak faith shall save; for it interests
   us in Christ, and makes Him and all His benefits ours. For it is not
   the strength of our faith that saves, but the truth of our faith--not
   the weakness of our faith that condemns, but the want of faith; for the
   least faith layeth hold on Christ, and so will save us. Neither are we
   saved by the worth or quantity of our faith, but by Christ, who is laid
   hold on by a weak faith as well as a strong. Just as a weak hand that
   can put meat into the mouth shall feed and nourish the body as well as
   if it were a strong hand; seeing the body is not nourished by the
   strength of the hand, but by the goodness of the meat."--The Doctrine
   of Faith, by John Rogers, Preacher of God's Word, at Dedham, in Essex.
   1634.

   (7) "It is one thing to have a thing surely, another thing to know I
   have it surely. We seek many things that we have in our hands, and we
   have many things that we think we have lost. So a believer, who hath a
   sure belief, yet doth not always know that he so believeth. Faith is
   necessary to salvation: but full assurance that I do believe is not of
   like necessity."--Ball on Faith. 1637.

   (8) "There is a weak faith, which yet is true; and although it be weak,
   yet, because it is true, it shall not be rejected of Christ.

   "Faith is not created perfect at the first, as Adam was; but is like a
   man in the ordinary course of nature, who is first an instrument, then
   a child, then a youth, then a man.

   "Some utterly reject all weak ones, and tax all weakness in faith with
   hypocrisy. Certainly these are either proud or cruel men.

   "Some comfort and establish those who are weak, saying, Be quiet. Thou
   hast faith and grace enough, and art good enough: thou needest no more,
   neither must thou be too righteous.' (Eccles. vii. 16.) These are soft,
   but not safe, cushions: these are fawning flatterers, and not faithful
   friends.

   "Some comfort and exhort, saying, Be of good cheer: He who hath begun a
   good work will also finish it in you; therefore pray that His grace may
   abound in you; yea, do not sit still, but go forward, and march on in
   the way of the Lord.' (Heb. vi. 1.) Now this is the safest and best
   course."--Questions, Observations, etc., upon the Gospel according to
   St. Matthew, by Richard Ward, sometime Student at Cambridge, and
   Preacher of the Gospel in London. 1640.

   (9) "A man may be in the favour of God, in the state of grace, a
   justified man before God, and yet want the sensible assurance of His
   salvation, and of the favour of God in Christ.

   "A man may have saving grace in him, and not perceive it himself; a man
   may have true justifying faith in him, and not have the use and
   operation of it, so far as to work in him a comfortable assurance of
   his reconciliation with God. Nay, I will say more: a man may be in the
   state of grace, and have true justifying faith in him, and yet be so
   far from sensible assurance of it in himself, as in his own sense and
   feeling he may seem to be assured of the contrary. Job was certainly in
   this case when he cried unto God, Wherefore hidest Thou Thy face and
   boldest me for Thine enemy?' (Job xiii. 24.)

   "The weakest faith will justify. If thou canst receive Christ and rest
   upon Him, even with the weakest faith, it will serve thy turn. Take
   heed thou think not it is the strength of thy faith that justifieth
   thee. No, no: it is Christ and His perfect righteousness which thy
   faith receiveth and resteth upon, that doth it. He that hath the
   feeblest and weakest hand may receive an alms and apply a sovereign
   plaster to his wound, as well as he that hath the strongest, and
   receive as much good by it too."--Lectures upon the 51st Psalmy
   preached at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, by Arthur Hildersam, Minister of Jesus
   Christ. 1642.

   (10) "Though your grace be never so weak, if ye have truth of grace,
   you have as great a share in the righteousness of Christ for your
   justification as the strong Christian hath. You have as much of Christ
   imputed to you as any other."--Sermons by William Bridge, formerly
   Fellow of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, and Pastor of the Church of
   Christ, in Great Yarmouth. 1648.

   (1) "There are some who are true believers, and yet weak in faith. They
   do indeed receive Christ and free grace, but it is with a shaking hand;
   they have, as divines say, the faith of adherence; they will stick to
   Christ, as theirs. But they want the faith of evidence; they cannot see
   themselves as His. They are believers, but of little faith; they hope
   that Christ will not cast them off, but are not sure that He will take
   them up."--Sips of Sweetness, or Consolation for Weak Relievers, by
   John Durant, Preacher in Canterbury Cathedral. 1649.

   (12) "I know, thou sayest, that Jesus Christ came into the world to
   save sinners: and that Whosoever believeth in Him shall not perish, but
   have eternal life.' (John iii. 15.) Neither can I know but that, in a
   sense of my own sinful condition, I do cast myself in some measure upon
   my Saviour, and lay some hold upon His all-sufficient redemption: but,
   alas, my apprehensions of Him are so feeble, as that they can afford no
   sound comfort to my soul!

   "Courage, my son. Were it that thou lookedst to be justified, and saved
   by the power of the very act of thy faith, thou hadst reason to be
   disheartened with the conscience of the weakness thereof; but now that
   the virtue and efficacy of this happy work is in the object apprehended
   by thee, which is the infinite merits and mercy of thy God and Saviour,
   which cannot be abated by thine infirmities, thou hast cause to take
   heart to thyself, and cheerfully to expect His salvation.

   "Understand thy case aright. Here is a double hand, that helps us up
   toward Heaven. Our hand of faith lays hold upon our Saviour; our
   Saviour's hand of mercy and plenteous redemption lays hold on us. Our
   hold of Him is feeble and easily loosed; His hold of us is strong and
   irresistible.

   "If work were stood upon, a strength of hand were necessary; but now
   that only taking and receiving of a precious gift is required, why may
   not a weak hand do that as well as a strong? As well, though not as
   forcibly."--Bishop Hall's "Balm of Gilead." 1650.

   (13) "I find not salvation put upon the strength of faith, but the
   truth of faith--not upon the brightest degree, but upon any degree of
   faith. It is not said, If you have such a degree of faith you shall be
   justified and saved; but simply believing is required. The lowest
   degree of true faith will do it; as Romans x. 9, If thou shalt confess
   with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that
   God hath raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be saved.' The thief upon
   the cross had not attained to such high degrees of faith: he by one
   act, and that of a weak faith, was justified and saved. (Luke xxiii.
   42.)"--Exposition of the Prophet E^ekiel, by William Greenhill, Rector
   of Stepney, London, and Chaplain to the Dukes of York and Gloucester.
   1650.

   (14) "A man may have true grace that hath not the assurance of the love
   and favour of God, or the remission of his sins, and salvation of his
   soul. A man may be God's, and yet he not know it; his estate may be
   good, and yet he not see it; he may be in a safe condition, when he is
   not in a comfortable position. All may be well with him in the court of
   glory, when he would give a thousand worlds that all were but well in
   the court of conscience.

   "Assurance is requisite to the well-being of a Christian, but not to
   the being; it is requisite to the consolation of a Christian, but not
   to the salvation of a Christian; it is requisite to the well-being of
   grace, but not to the mere being of grace. Though a man cannot be saved
   without faith, yet he may be saved without assurance. God hath in many
   places of the Scripture declared that without faith there is no
   salvation; but God hath not in any one place of Scripture declared that
   without assurance there is no salvation."--Heaven on Earth, by Thomas
   Brooks, Preacher of the Gospel, at St. Margaret's, Fish Street Hill,
   London. 1654.

   (15) "You that can clear this to your own hearts that you have faith,
   though it be weak, be not discouraged, be not troubled. Consider that
   the smallest degree of faith is true, is saving faith as well as the
   greatest. A spark of fire is as true fire as any is in the element of
   fire. A drop of water is as true water as any is in the ocean. So the
   least grain of faith is as true faith, and as saving as the greatest
   faith in the world.

   "The least bud draws sap from the root as well as the greatest bough.
   So the weakest measure of faith doth as truly ingraft thee into Christ,
   and by that draw life from Christ, as well as the strongest. The
   weakest faith hath communion with the merits and blood of Christ as
   well as the strongest.

   "The least faith marries the soul to Christ. The weakest faith hath as
   equal a share in God's love as the strongest. We are beloved in Christ,
   and the least measure of faith makes us members of Christ. The least
   faith hath equal right to the promises as the strongest. And therefore
   let not our souls be discouraged for weakness."--Nature and Royalties
   of Faith, by Samuel Bolton, D.D., of Christ's College, Cambridge. 1657.

   (16) "Some are afraid they have no faith at all, because they have not
   the highest degree of faith, which is full assurance, or because they
   want the comfort which others attain to, even joy unspeakable and full
   of glory. But for the rolling of this stone out of the way, we must
   remember there are several degrees of faith. It is possible thou mayest
   have faith, though not the highest degree of faith, and so joy in the
   Spirit. That is rather a point of faith than faith itself. It is indeed
   rather a living by sense than a living by faith, when we are cheered up
   with continual cordials. A stronger faith is required to live upon God
   without comfort, than when God shines in on our spirit with abundance
   of joy."--Matthew Lawrence, Preacher at Ipswich, on Faith. 1657.

   (17) "If any person abroad have thought that a special and full
   persuasion of the pardon of their sin was of the essence of faith, let
   them answer for it. Our divines at home generally are of another
   judgment. Bishop Davenant and Bishop Prideaux, and others, have shown
   the great difference between recumbrance and assurance, and they all do
   account and call assurance, a daughter, fruit, and consequent of faith.
   And the late learned Arrowsmith tells us, that God seldom bestows
   assurance upon believers till they are grown in grace: for, says he,
   there is the same difference between faith of recumbence and faith of
   assurance, as is between reason and learning. Reason is the foundation
   of learning; so, as there can be no learning if reason be wanting (as
   in beasts), in like manner there can be no assurance where there is no
   faith of adherence. Again: as reason well exercised m the study of arts
   and sciences arises to learning; so faith being well exercised on its
   proper object, and by its proper fruits, arises to assurance. Further,
   as by negligence, non- attendance, or some violent disease, learning
   may be lost, while reason doth abide; so by temptation, or by spiritual
   sloth, assurance may be lost, while saving faith may abide. Lastly, as
   all men have reason, but all men are not learned; so all regenerate
   persons have faith to comply savingly with the gospel method of
   salvation, but all true believers have not assurance."--Sermon by R.
   Fair dough, Fellow of Immanuel College, Cambridge, in the Morning
   Exercises, preached at Southwark. 1660.

   (18) We must distinguish between weakness of faith and nullity. A weak
   faith is true. The bruised reed is but weak, yet it is such as Christ
   will not break. Though thy faith be but weak, yet be not discouraged. A
   weak faith may receive a strong Christ; a weak hand can tie the knot in
   marriage as well as a strong; a weak eye might have seen the brazen
   serpent. The promise is not made to strong faith, but to true. The
   promise doth not say, Whosoever hath a giant faith that can remove
   mountains, that can stop the mouth of lions, shall be saved; but
   whosoever believes, be his faith never so small.

   "You may have the water of the Spirit poured on you in sanctification,
   though not the oil of gladness in assurance; there may be faith of
   adherence, and not of evidence; there may be life in the root where
   there is no fruit in the branches, and faith in the heart where no
   fruit of assurance."--A Body of Divinity, by Thomas Watson, formerly
   Minister of St. Stephen's, Walbrook, London. 1660.

   (19) "Many of God's dear children for a long time may remain very
   doubtful as to their present and eternal condition, and know not what
   to conclude, whether they shall be damned or whether they shall be
   saved. There are believers of several growths in the Church of
   God,--fathers, young men, children, and babes; and as in most families
   there are more babes and children than grown men, so in the Church of
   God there are more weak, doubting Christians than strong ones, grown up
   to a full assurance. A babe may be born, and yet not know it; so a man
   may be born again, and yet not be sure of it.

   "We make a difference betwixt saving faith, as such, and a full
   persuasion of the heart. Some of those that shall be saved may not be
   certain that they shall be saved; for the promise is made to the grace
   ot faith, and not to the evidence of it--to faith as true, and not to
   faith as strong. They may be sure of heaven, and yet in their own sense
   not assured of heaven."--Sermon by Rev. Thomas Doolittle, of Pembroke
   Hall, Cambridge, and sometime Rector of St. Alphege, London, in the
   Morning Exercises, at Cripplegate. 1661.

   (20) "Is it not necessary to justification to be assured that my sins
   are pardoned, and that I am justified? No: that is no act of faith as
   it justifieth, but an effect and fruit that followeth after
   justification.

   "It is one thing for a man to have his salvation certain, another thing
   to be certain that it is certain.

   "Even as a man fallen into a river, and like to be drowned, as he is
   carried down with the flood, espies the bough of a tree hanging over
   the river, which he catcheth at, and clings unto with all his might to
   save him, and seeing no other way of succour but that, ventures his
   life upon it. This man, so soon as he has fastened on this bough, is in
   a safe condition, though all troubles, fears, and terrors are not
   presently out of his mind, until he comes to himself, and sees himself
   quite out of danger. Then he is sure he is safe; but he was safe before
   he was sure. Even so it is with a believer. Faith is but the espying of
   Christ as the only means to save, and the reaching out of the heart to
   lay hold upon Him. God hath spoke the word, and made the promise to His
   Son: I believe Him to be the only Saviour, and remit my soul to Him to
   be saved by His mediation. So soon as the soul can do this, God
   imputeth the righteousness of His Son unto it, and it is actually
   justified in the court of heaven, though it is not presently quieted
   and pacified in the court of conscience. That is done afterwards: in
   some sooner, in some later, by the fruits and effects of
   justification."--Archbishop Usher's "Body of Divinity." 1670.

   (21) "There are those who doubt, because they doubt, and multiply
   distrust upon itself, concluding that they have no faith, because they
   find so much and so frequent doubting within them. But this is a great
   mistake. Some doublings there may be, where there is even much faith;
   and a little faith there may be, where there is much doubting.

   "Our Saviour requires, and delights in a strong, firm believing on Him,
   though the least and weakest He rejects not."--Archbishop Leighton's
   Lectures on the first nine chapters of St. Matthew's Gospel. 1670.

   (22) "Many formerly, and those of the highest remark and eminency, have
   placed true faith in no lower degree than assurance, or the secure
   persuasion of the pardon of their sins, the acceptation of their
   persons, and their future salvation.

   "But this, as it is very sad and uncomfortable for thousands of
   doubting and deserted souls, concluding all those to fall short of
   grace who fall short of certainty, so hath it given the Papists too
   great advantage.

   "Faith is not assurance. But this doth sometimes crown and reward a
   strong, vigorous and heroic faith; the Spirit of God breaking in upon
   the soul with an evidencing light, and scattering all that darkness,
   and those fears and doubts which before beclouded it."--Bishop Hopkins
   on the Covenants. 1680.

   (23) "A want of assurance is not unbelief. Drooping spirits may be
   believers. There is a manifest distinction made between faith in
   Christ, and the comfort of that faith--between believing to eternal
   life, and knowing we have eternal life. There is a difference between a
   child's having a right to an estate, and his full knowledge of the
   title.

   "The character of faith may be written in the heart, as letters
   engraven upon a seal, yet filled with so much dust as not to be
   distinguished. The dust hinders the reading of the letters, yet doth
   not raze them out."--Discourses by Stephen Charnock, of Emmanuel
   College, Cambridge. 1680.

   (24) "Some rob themselves of their own comfort by placing saving faith
   in full assurance. Faith, and sense of faith, are two distinct and
   separable mercies; you may have truly received Christ, and not receive
   the knowledge or assurance of it. Some there be that say, Thou art our
   God,' of whom God never said, You are my people', these have no
   authority to be called the sons of God: others there are, of whom God
   saith, These are my people,' yet they dare not call God their God';
   these have authority to be called the sons of God, yet know it not.
   They have received Christ, that is their safety; but they have not yet
   received the knowledge and assurance of it, that is their
   trouble. . . . The father owns his child in the cradle, who yet knows
   him not to be his father."--Method of Grace, by John Flavel, Minister
   of the Gospel at Dartmouth, Devon. 1680.

   (25) "It is confessed weak faith hath as much peace with God, through
   Christ, as another hath by strong faith, but not so much bosom peace.

   "Weak faith will as surely land the Christian in heaven as strong
   faith, for it is impossible the least dram of true grace should perish,
   being all incorruptible seed; but the weak, doubting Christian is not
   like to have so pleasant a voyage thither as another with strong faith.
   Though all in the ship come safe to shore, yet he that is all the way
   sea-sick hath not so comfortable a voyage as he that is strong and
   healthful."--The Christian in Complete Armour, by William Gurnall,
   sometime Ejector of Lavenham, Suffolk. 1680.

   (26) "Be not discouraged if it doth not yet appear to you that you were
   given by the Father to the Son. It may be, though you do not see it.
   Many of the given do not for a long time know it; yea, I see no great
   danger in saying that not a few of the given to the Son may be in
   darkness, and doubts, and fears about it, till the last and brightest
   day declare it, and till the last sentence proclaims it.

   "If, therefore, any of you be in the dark about your own election, be
   not discouraged: it may be, though you do not know it."--Sermons on the
   Lord's Prayer, by Robert Traill, Minister of the Gospel, in London, and
   sometime at Cranbrook, Kent. 1690.

   (27) "Assurance is not essential to the being of faith. It is a strong
   faith; but we read likewise of a weak faith, little faith, faith like a
   grain of mustard seed. True saving faith in Jesus Christ is only
   distinguishable by its different degrees; but in every degree and in
   every subject, it is universally of the same kind."--Sermons, by the
   Key. John Newton, sometime Vicar of Olney, and Rector of St. Mary,
   Woolnoth, London. 1767.

   (28) "There is no reason why weak believers should conclude against
   themselves. Weak faith unites as really with Christ as strong faith--as
   the least bud in the vine is drawing sap and life from the root, no
   less than the strongest branch. Weak believers, therefore, have
   abundant cause to be thankful; and while they reach after growth in
   grace, ought not to overlook what they have already received."--Letter
   of Rev. Henry Venn. 1784.

   (29) "The faith necessary and sufficient for our salvation is not
   assurance. Its tendency doubtless is to produce that lively expectation
   of the Divine favour which will issue in a full confidence. But the
   confidence is not itself the faith of which we speak, nor is it
   necessarily included in it: nay, it is a totally distinct thing.

   "Assurance will generally accompany a high degree of faith. But there
   are sincere persons who are endued with only small measures of grace,
   or in whom the exercise of that grace may be greatly obstructed. When
   such defects or hindrances prevail, many fears and distresses may be
   expected to arise."--The Christian System, by the Rev. Thomas Robinson,
   Vicar of St. Mary's, Leicester. 1795.

   (30) "Salvation, and the joy of salvation, are not always
   contemporaneous; the latter does not always accompany the former in
   present experience.

   "A sick man may be under a process of recovery, and yet be in doubt
   concerning the restoration of his health. Pain and weakness may cause
   him to hesitate. A child may be heir to Ms estate or kingdom, and yet
   derive no joy from the prospect of his future inheritance. He may be
   unable to trace his genealogy, or to read his title-deeds, and the
   testament of his father; or with a capacity of reading them he may be
   unable to understand their import, and his guardian may for a time deem
   it right to suffer him to remain in ignorance. But his ignorance does
   not affect the validity of his title.

   "Personal assurance of salvation is not necessarily connected with
   faith. They are not essentially the same. Every believer might indeed
   infer, from the effect produced in his own heart, his own safety and
   privileges; but many who truly believe are unskilful in the word of
   righteousness, and fail of drawing the conclusion from Scriptural
   premises which they would be justified in drawing."--Lectures on the
   51st Psalm, by the Rev. Thomas Biddulph, Minister of St. James's,
   Bristol. 1830. 134
     __________________________________________________________________

   [19] "Full assurance that Christ hath delivered Paul from condemnation,
   yea, so full and real as produceth thanksgiving and triumphing in
   Christ, may and doth consist with complaints and outcries of a wretched
   condition for the indwelling of the body of sin."--Rutherford's Triumph
   of Faith. 1645.

   [20] We do not vindicate every vain pretender to the witness of the
   spirit'; we are aware that there are those in whose professions of
   religion we can see nothing but their forwardness and confidence to
   recommend them. But let us not reject any doctrine of revelation
   through an over-anxious fear of consequences."--Robinson's Christian
   System. "True assurance is built upon a Scripture basis: presumption
   hath no Scripture to show for its warrant; it is like a will without
   seal and witnesses, which is null and void in law. Presumption wants
   both the witness of the Word and the seal of the Spirit. Assurance
   always keeps the heart in a lowly posture; but presumption is bred of
   pride. Feathers fly up, but gold descends; he who hath this golden
   assurance, his heart descends in humility."--Watson's Body of Divinity.
   1650. "Presumption is joined with looseness of life; persuasion with a
   tender conscience; that dares sin because it is sure, this dares not
   for fear of losing assurance. Persuasion will not sin, because it cost
   her Saviour so dear; presumption will sin, because grace doth abound.
   Humility is the way to heaven. They that are proudly secure of their
   going to heaven do not so often come thither as they that are afraid of
   going to hell."--Adams on Second Epistle of Peter. 1633.

   [21] "They are quite mistaken that think faith and humility are
   inconsistent; they not only agree well together, but they cannot be
   parted."--Traill.

   [22] "To be assured of our salvation," Augustine saith, "is no arrogant
   stoutness; it is our faith. It is no pride; it is devotion. It is no
   presumption; it is God's promise."--Bishop Jewell's Defence of the
   Apology. 1570 "If the ground of our assurance rested in and on
   ourselves, it might justly be called presumption; but the Lord and the
   power of His might being grounded thereof, they either know not what is
   the might of His power, or else too lightly esteem it, who account
   assured confidence thereon presumption."--Gouge's Whole Armour of God.
   1647. "Upon what ground is this certainty built? Surely not upon
   anything that is in us. Our assurance of perseverance is grounded
   wholly upon God. If we look upon ourselves, we see cause of fear and
   doubting; but if we look up to God, we shall find cause enough for
   assurance."--Hildersam on John iv. (1632). "Our hope is not hung upon
   such an untwisted thread as, I imagine so,' or It is likely'; but the
   cable, the strong rope of our fastened anchor, is the oath and promise
   of Him who is eternal verity. Our salvation is fastened with God's own
   hand, and Christ's own strength, to the strong stake of God's
   unchangeable nature."--Rutherford's Letters. 1637.

   [23] "Never did a believer in Jesus Christ die or drown in his voyage
   to heaven. They will all be found safe and sound with the Lamb on Mount
   Zion. Christ loseth none of them; yea, nothing of them. (John vi. 39.)
   Not a bone of a believer is to be seen in the field of battle. They are
   all more than conquerors through Him that loved them." (Rom. viii.
   37.)--Traill.

   [24] The reader who would like to hear more about this point is
   referred to a Note at the end of this paper, in which he will find
   extracts from several well-known English Divines, supporting the view
   here maintained. The extracts are too long for insertion in this page.

   [25] "He that believeth on Jesus shall never be confounded. Never was
   any; neither shall you, if you believe. It was a great word of faith
   spoken by a dying man, who had been converted in a singular way,
   betwixt his condemnation and execution: his last words were these,
   spoken with a mighty shout: Never man perished with his face towards
   Christ Jesus.'"--Traill.

   [26] "The greatest thing that we can desire, next to the glory of God,
   is our own salvation; and the sweetest thing we can desire is the
   assurance of our salvation. In this life we cannot get higher than to
   be assured of that which in the next life is to be enjoyed. All saints
   shall enjoy a heaven when they leave this earth; some saints enjoy a
   heaven while they are here on earth."--Joseph Caryl. 1653.

   [27] "It was a saying of Bishop Latimer to Ridley, When I live in a
   settled and steadfast assurance about the state of my soul, methinks
   than I am as bold as a lion. I can laugh at all trouble: no affliction
   daunts me. But when I am eclipsed in my comforts, I am of so fearful a
   spirit that I could run into a very mouse-hole."--Quoted by Christopher
   Love. 1653. "Assurance will assist us in all duties: it will arm us
   against all temptations; It will answer all objections; it will sustain
   us in all conditions into which the saddest of times can bring us. If
   God be for us, who can be against us?'"--Bishop Reynolds on Hosea xiv.
   (1642). "We cannot come amiss to him that hath assurance. God is his.
   Hath he lost a friend?--his father lives. Hath he lost an only
   child?--God hath given him His only Son. Hath he scarcity of
   bread?--God hath given him the finest of the wheat, the bread of life.
   Are his comforts gone?--he hath a Comforter. Doth he meet with
   storms?--he knows where to put in for harbour. God is his Portion, and
   heaven is his haven."--Thomas Watson. 1662.

   [28] These were John Bradford's words in prison, shortly before his
   execution: "I have no request to make. If Queen Mary gives me my life,
   I will thank her; if she will banish me, I will thank her; if she will
   burn me, I will thank her; if she will condemn me to perpetual
   imprisonment, I will thank her." This was Rutherford's experience when
   banished to Aberdeen: "How blind are my adversaries, who sent me to a
   banqueting house, and not to a prison or a place of exile." "My prison
   is a palace to me, and Christ's banqueting house."--Letters.

   [29] These were the last words of Hugh Mackail on the scaffold, at
   Edinburgh, 1666: "Now I begin my intercourse with God, which shall
   never be broken off. Farewell, father and mother, friends and
   relations; farewell, the world and all its delights; farewell, meat and
   drinks; farewell, sun, moon and stars. Welcome, God and Father;
   welcome, sweet Lord Jesus, the Mediator of the new covenant; welcome,
   blessed Spirit of grace, and God of all consolation; welcome, glory;
   welcome, eternal life; welcome, death. O Lord, into Thy hands I commit
   my spirit; for Thou hast redeemed my soul, O Lord God of truth!"

   [30] These were Rutherford's words on his death-bed: "O that all my
   brethren did know what a Master I have served, and what peace I have
   this day! I shall sleep in Christ, and when I awake I shall be
   satisfied with His likeness." 1661. These were Baxter's words on his
   death-bed: "I bless God I have a well-grounded assurance of my eternal
   happiness, and great peace and comfort within." Towards the close he
   was asked how he did. The answer was, "Almost well." 1691.

   [31] "The least degree of faith takes away the sting of death, because
   it takes away guilt; but the full assurance of faith breaks the very
   teeth and jaws of death, by taking away the fear and dread of
   it."--Fairclough's Sermon in the Morning Exercises.

   [32] "Assurance would make us active and lively in God's service: it
   would excite prayer, quicken obedience. Faith would make us walk, but
   assurance would make us run--we should think we could never do enough
   for God. Assurance would be as wings to the bird, as weights to the
   clock, to set all the wheels of obedience a-running."--Thomas Watson.
   "Assurance will make a man fervent, constant, and abundant in the work
   of the Lord. When the assured Christian hath done one work, he is
   calling out for another.-- What is next, Lord, says the assured soul,
   what is nest? An assured Christian will put his hand to any work, he
   will put his neck in any yoke for Christ--he never thinks he hath done
   enough, he always thinks he had done too little; and when he hath done
   all he can, he sits down, saying, I am an unprofitable
   servant".--Thomas Brooks.

   [33] "The true assurance of salvation which the Spirit of God hath
   wrought in any heart hath that force to restrain a man from looseness
   of life, and to knit his heart in love and obedience to God, as nothing
   else hath in all the world. It is certainly either the want of faith
   and assurance of God's love, or a false and carnal assurance of it,
   that is the true cause of all the licentiousness that reigns in the
   world."--Hildersam 51st Psalm. "None walk so evenly with God, as they
   who are assured of the love of God. Faith is the mother of obedience,
   and sureness of trust makes way for strictness of life. When men are
   loose from Christ, they are loose in point of duty, and their floating
   belief is soon discovered in their inconstancy and unevenness of
   walking. We do not, with alacrity, engage in that of the success of
   which we are doubtful; and, therefore, when we know not whether God
   will accept us or not, when we are off and on in point of trust, we are
   just so in the course of our lives, and serve God by fits and starts.
   It is the slander of the world to think assurance an idle
   doctrine."--Manton's Exposition of James. 1660. "Who is more obliged,
   or who feels the obligation to observance more cogently--the son who
   knows his near relation, and knows his father loves him, or the servant
   that hath great reason to doubt it? Fear is a weak and impotent
   principle, in comparison of love. Terrors may awaken: love enlivens.
   Terrors may almost persuade': love over-persuades. Sure am I that a
   believer's knowledge that his Beloved is his, and he is his Beloved's
   (Cant. vi. 3), is found by experience to lay the most strong and cogent
   obligations upon him to loyalty and faithfulness to the Lord Jesus. For
   as to him that believes Christ is precious (1 Peter ii. 7), so to him
   that knows he believes Christ is so much the more precious, even the
   chiefset of ten thousand.'" (Cant. v. 10)--Fairclough's Sermon in
   Morning Exercises. 1660. "Is it necessary that men should be kept in
   continual dread of damnation, in order to render them circumspect and
   ensure their attention to duty? Will not the well-grounded expectation
   of heaven prove far more efficacious? Love is the noblest and strangest
   principle of obedience; nor can it be but that a sense of God's love to
   us will increase our desire to please Him."--Robinson's Christian
   System.

   [34] "That which breeds so much perplexity is, that we would invert
   God's order. If I knew,' say some, that the promise belonged to me, and
   Christ was a Saviour to me, I could believe': that is to say, I would
   first see and then believe. But the true method is just the contrary: I
   had fainted,' says David, unless I had believed to see the goodness of
   the Lord.' He believed it first, and saw it afterwards."--Archbishop
   Leighton. "It is a weak and ignorant, but common thought of Christians,
   that they ought not to look for heaven, nor trust Christ for eternal
   glory, till they be well advanced in holiness and meetness for it. But
   as the first sanctification of our natures flows from out faith and
   trust in Christ for acceptance, so our further sanctification and
   meetness for glory flows from the renewed and repeated exercise of
   faith in Him."--Traill.

   [35] The Westminster Confession of Faith gives an admirable account of
   justification: "Those whom God effectually calleth, He also freely
   justified!--not by infusing righteousness into them, but by pardoning
   their sins, and by accounting and accepting their persons as righteous;
   not for anything wrought in them or done by them, but for Christ's sake
   alone; not by imputing faith itself, the act of believing, or any other
   evangelical obedience, to them, as their righteousness; but by imputing
   the obedience and righteousness of Christ unto them, they receiving and
   resting on Him and His righteousness by faith."

   [36] "Whose fault is it that thy interest in Christ is not put out of
   question? Were Christians more in self-examination, more close in
   walking with God, and if they had more near communion with God and were
   more in acting of faith, this shameful darkness and doubting would
   quickly vanish."--Traill. "A lazy Christian shall always want four
   things: viz., comfort, content, confidence, and assurance. God hath
   made a separation between joy and idleness, between assurance and
   laziness; and, therefore, it is impossible for thee to bring these
   together that God hath put so far asunder."--Thomas Brooks. "Are you in
   depths and doubts, staggering and uncertain, not knowing what is your
   condition, nor whether you have any interest in the forgiveness that is
   of God? Are you tossed up and down between hopes and fears, and want
   peace, consolation, and establishment? Why lie you upon your faces? Get
   up: watch, pray, fast, meditate, offer violence to your lusts and
   corruptions; fear not, startle not at their crying to be spared; press
   unto the throne of grace by prayer, supplications, importunities,
   restless requests--this is the way to take the kingdom of God. These
   things are not peace, are not assurance; but they are part of the means
   God hath appointed for the attainment of them."--Owen on the 130th
   Psalm.

   [37] "Would'st thou have thy hope strong? Then keep thy conscience
   pure: thou canst not defile one without weakening the other. The godly
   person that is loose and careless in his holy walking will soon find
   his hope languishing. All sin disposeth the soul that tampers with it
   to trembling fears and shakings of heart."--Gurnall. "One great and too
   common cause of distress is the secret maintaining some known sin: it
   puts out the eye of the soul, or dimmeth it and stupefies it, that it
   can neither see nor feel its own condition; but especially it provoketh
   God to withdraw Himself, His comforts, and the assistance of His
   Spirit."--Baxter's Saints' Rest. "The stars which have least circuit
   are nearest the pole; and men whose earths are least entangled with the
   world are always nearest to God and to the assurance of His favour.
   Worldly Christians, remember this. You and the world must part, or else
   assurance and your souls will never meet."--Thomas Brooks.

   [38] "They are doubly miserable that have neither heaven nor earth,
   temporals nor eternals, made sure to them in changing times."--Thomas
   Brooks.

   [39] "None have assurance at all times. As in a walk that is shaded
   with trees and chequered with light and shadow, some tracks and paths
   in it are dark and others are sunshine. Such is usually the life of the
   most assured Christian."--Bishop Hopkins. "It is very suspicious, that
   that person is a hypocrite that is always in the same frame, let him
   pretend it to be never so good."--Traill.
     __________________________________________________________________

VIII.
MOSES

  AN EXAMPLE

   "By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the
   son of Pharaoh's daughter:

   "Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
   enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;

   "Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in
   Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward."--Hebrews
   xi. 24-26.

   THE characters of God's most eminent saints, as drawn and described in
   the Bible, form a most useful part of Holy Scripture. Abstract
   doctrines, and principles, and precepts, are all most valuable in their
   way; but after all, nothing is more helpful than a pattern or example.
   Do we want to know what practical holiness is? Let us sit down and
   study the picture of an eminently holy man. I propose in this paper to
   set before my readers the history of a man who lived by faith, and left
   us a pattern of what faith can do in promoting holiness of character.
   To all who want to know what "living by faith" means, I offer Moses as
   an example.

   The eleventh chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, from which my text
   is taken, is a great chapter: it deserves to be printed in golden
   letters. I can well believe it must have been most cheering and
   encouraging to a converted Jew. I suppose no members of the early
   Church found so much difficulty in a profession of Christianity as the
   Hebrews did. The way was narrow to all, but preeminently so to them.
   The cross was heavy to all but surely they had to carry double weight.
   And this chapter would refresh them like a cordial--it would be as
   "wine to those that be of heavy hearts." Its words would "be pleasant
   as the honey-comb, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones." (Prov.
   xxxi. 6; xvi. 24.)

   The three verses I am going to explain are far from being the least
   interesting in the chapter. Indeed I think few, if any, have so strong
   a claim on our attention. And I will explain why I say so.

   It seems to me that the work of faith described in the story of Moses
   comes home more especially to our own case. The men of God who are
   named in the former part of the chapter are all examples to us beyond
   question. But we cannot literally do what most of them did, however
   much we may drink into their spirit. We are not called upon to offer a
   literal sacrifice like Abel--or to build a literal ark like Noah--or to
   leave our country literally, and dwell in tents, and offer up our Isaac
   like Abraham. But the faith of Moses comes nearer to us. It seems to
   operate in a way more familiar to our own experience. It made him take
   up a line of conduct such as we must sometimes take up ourselves in the
   present day, each in our own walk of life, if we would be consistent
   Christians, And for this reason I think these three verses deserve more
   than ordinary consideration.

   Now I have nothing but the simplest things to say about them. I shall
   only try to show the greatness of the things Moses did, and the
   principle on which he did them. And then perhaps we shall be better
   prepared for the practical instruction which the verses appear to hold
   out to every one who will receive it.

   I. First, then, I will speak of what Moses gave up and refused.

   Moses gave up three things for the sake of his soul. He felt that his
   soul would not be saved if he kept them--so he gave them up. And in so
   doing, I say that he made three of the greatest sacrifices that man's
   heart can possibly make. Let us see.

   (1) He gave up rank and greatness.

   "He refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter." We all know
   his history. The daughter of Pharaoh had preserved his life, when he
   was an infant. She had gone further than that: she had adopted him and
   educated him as her own son.

   If some writers of history may be trusted, she was Pharaoh's only
   child. Some go so far as to say that in the common order of things,
   Moses would one day have been King of Egypt! [40] That may be, or may
   not; we cannot tell. It is enough for us to know that, from his
   connection with Pharaoh's daughter, Moses might have been, if he had
   pleased, a very great man. If he had been content with the position in
   which he found himself at the Egyptian court, he might easily have been
   among the first (if not the very first) in all the land of Egypt.

   Let us think, for a moment, how great this temptation was.

   Here was a man of like passions with ourselves. He might have had as
   much greatness as earth can well give. Rank, power, place, honour,
   titles, dignities--all were before him, and within his grasp. These are
   the things for which many men are continually struggling. These are the
   prizes which there is an incessant race in the world around us to
   obtain. To be somebody, to be looked up to, to raise themselves in the
   scale of society, to get a handle to their names--these are the very
   things for which many sacrifice time, and thought, and health, and life
   itself. But Moses would not have them as a gift. He turned his back
   upon them. He refused them. He gave them up!

   (2) And more than this--he refused pleasure.

   Pleasure of every kind, no doubt, was at his feet, if he had liked to
   take it up--sensual pleasure, intellectual pleasure, social
   pleasure--whatever could strike his fancy. Egypt was a land of artists,
   a residence of learned men, a resort of everyone who had skill, or
   science of any description. There was nothing which could feed the
   "lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, or the pride of life," which
   one in the place of Moses might not easily have commanded and possessed
   as his own. (1 John ii. 16.)

   Let us think again, how great was this temptation also.

   Pleasure, be it remembered, is the one thing for which millions live.
   They differ, perhaps, in their views of what makes up real pleasure,
   but all agree in seeking first and foremost to obtain it. Pleasure and
   enjoyment in the holidays is the grand object to which a schoolboy
   looks forward. Pleasure and satisfaction in making himself independent
   is the mark on which the young man in business fixes his eye. Pleasure
   and ease in retiring from business with a fortune is the aim which the
   merchant sets before him. Pleasure and bodily comfort at his own home
   is the sum of the poor man's wishes. Pleasure and fresh excitement in
   politics, in travelling, in amusements, in company, in books--this is
   the goal towards which the rich man is straining. Pleasure is the
   shadow which all alike are hunting--high and low, rich and poor, old
   and young, one with another--each, perhaps, pretending to despise his
   neighbour for seeking it--each in his own way seeking it for
   himself--each secretly wondering that he does not find it--each firmly
   persuaded that somewhere or other it is to be found. This was the cup
   that Moses had before his lips. He might have drunk as deeply as he
   liked of earthly pleasure; but he would not have it. He turned his back
   upon it. He refused it. He gave it up!

   (3) And more than this--he refused riches.

   "The treasures in Egypt" is an expression that seems to tell of
   boundless wealth which Moses might have enjoyed, had he been content to
   remain with Pharaoh's daughter. We may well suppose these "treasures"
   would have been a mighty fortune. Enough is still remaining in Egypt to
   give us some faint idea of the money at its King's disposal. The
   pyramids, and obelisks, and temples, and statues are still standing
   there as witnesses. The ruins at Carnac, and Luxor, and Denderah, and
   many other places, are still the mightiest buildings in the world. They
   testify to this day that the man who gave up Egyptian wealth, gave up
   something which even our English minds would find it hard to reckon up
   and estimate.

   Let us think once more, how great was this temptation.

   Let us consider, for a moment, the power of money--the immense
   influence that "the love of money" obtains over men's minds. Let us
   look around us and observe how men covet it, and what amazing pains and
   trouble they will go through to obtain it. Tell them of an island many
   thousand miles away, where something may be found which may be
   profitable, if imported, and at once a fleet of ships will be sent to
   get it. Show them a way to make 1 per cent, more of their money, and
   they will reckon you among the wisest of men--they will almost fall
   down and worship you. To possess money seems to hide defects--to cover
   over faults--to clothe a man with virtues. People can get over much, if
   you are rich! But here is a man who might have been rich, and would
   not. He would not have Egyptian treasures. He turned his back upon
   them. He refused them. He gave them up!

   Such were the things that Moses refused--rank, pleasure, riches, all
   three at once.

   Add to all this that he did it deliberately. He did not refuse these
   things in a hasty fit of youthful excitement.--He was forty years old.
   He was in the prime of life. He knew what he was about. He was a highly
   educated man, "learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians." (Acts vii.
   22.) He could weigh both sides of the question.

   Add to it that he did not refuse them because he was obliged. He was
   not like the dying man, who tells us "he craves nothing more in this
   world;" and why?--Because he is leaving the world, and cannot keep it.
   He was not like the pauper, who makes a merit of necessity, and says
   "he does not want riches"; and why?--Because he cannot get them. He was
   not like the old man who boasts that "he has laid aside worldly
   pleasures;" and why?--Because he is worn out, and cannot enjoy them.
   No! Moses refused what he might have enjoyed. Rank, pleasure, and
   riches did not leave him, but he left them.

   And then judge whether I am not right in saying that his was one of the
   greatest sacrifices mortal man ever made. Others have refused much, but
   none, I think, so much as Moses. Others have done well in the way of
   self-sacrifice and self-denial, but he excels them all.

   II. And now let me go on to the second thing I wish to consider. I will
   speak of what Moses chose.

   I think his choices as wonderful as his refusals. He chose three things
   for his soul's sake. The road to salvation led through them, and he
   followed it; and in so doing he chose three of the last things that man
   is ever disposed to take up.

   (1) For one thing he chose suffering and affliction.

   He left the ease and comfort of Pharaoh's court, and openly took part
   with the children of Israel. They were an enslaved and persecuted
   people--an object of distrust, suspicion, and hatred; and anyone who
   befriended them was sure to taste something of the bitter cup they were
   daily drinking.

   To the eye of sense there seemed no chance of their deliverance from
   Egyptian bondage, without a long and doubtful struggle. A settled home
   and country for them must have appeared a thing never likely to be
   obtained, however much desired. In fact, if ever man seemed to be
   choosing pain, trials, poverty, want, distress, anxiety, perhaps even
   death, with his eyes open, Moses was that man.

   Let us think how wonderful was this choice.

   Flesh and blood naturally shrink from pain. It is in us all to do so.
   We draw back by a kind of instinct from suffering, and avoid it if we
   can. If two courses of action are set before us, which both seem right,
   we generally take that which is the least disagreeable to flesh and
   blood. We spend our days in fear and anxiety when we think affliction
   is coming near us, and use every means to escape it. And when it does
   come, we often fret and murmur under the burden of it; and if we can
   only bear it patiently, we count it a great matter.

   But look here! Here is a man of like passions with ourselves, and he
   actually chooses affliction! Moses saw the cup of suffering that was
   before him if he left Pharaoh's court, and he chose it, preferred it,
   and took it up.

   (2) But he did more than this, he chose the company of a despised
   people.

   He left the society of the great and wise, among whom he had been
   brought up, and joined himself to the Children of Israel. He who had
   lived from infancy in the midst of rank, and riches, and luxury, came
   down from his high estate, and cast in his lot with poor men--slaves,
   serfs, helots, pariahs, bondservants, oppressed, destitute, afflicted,
   tormented--labourers in the brick-kiln.

   How wonderful, once more, was this choice!

   Generally speaking, we think it enough to carry our own troubles. We
   may be sorry for others whose lot is to be mean and despised.--We may
   even try to help them--we may give money to raise them--we may speak
   for them to those on whom they depend; but here we generally stop.

   But here is a man who does far more. He not merely feels for despised
   Israel, but actually goes down to them, adds himself to their society,
   and lives with them altogether. You would wonder if some great man in
   Grosvenor or Belgrave Square were to give up house, and fortune, and
   position in society, and go to live on a small allowance in some narrow
   lane in Bethnal Green, for the sake of doing good. Yet this would
   convey a very faint and feeble notion of the kind of thing that Moses
   did. He saw a despised people, and he chose their company in preference
   to that of the noblest in the land. He became one with them--their
   fellow, their companion in tribulation, their ally, their associate,
   and their friend.

   (3) But he did even more. He chose reproach and scorn.

   Who can conceive the torrent of mockery and ridicule that Moses would
   have to stem, in turning away from Pharaoh's court to join Israel! Men
   would tell him he was mad, foolish, weak, silly, out of his mind. He
   would lose his influence; he would forfeit the favour and good opinion
   of all among whom he had lived. But none of these things moved him. He
   left the court and joined the slaves!

   Let us think again, what a choice this was!

   There are few things more powerful than ridicule and scorn. It can do
   far more than open enmity and persecution. Many a man who would march
   up to a cannon's mouth, or lead a forlorn hope, or storm a breach, has
   found it impossible to face the mockery of a few companions, and has
   flinched from the path of duty to avoid it. To be laughed at! To be
   made a joke of! To be jested and sneered at! To be reckoned weak and
   silly! To be thought a fool!--There is nothing grand in all this, and
   many, alas, cannot make up their minds to undergo it!

   Yet here is a man who made up his mind to it, and did not shrink from
   the trial. Moses saw reproach and scorn before him, and he chose them,
   and accepted them for his portion.

   Such then were the things that Moses chose: affliction--the company of
   a despised people--and scorn.

   Set down beside all this, that Moses was no weak, ignorant, illiterate
   person, who did not know what he was about. You are specially told he
   was "mighty in words and in deeds;" and yet he chose as he did! (Acts
   vii. 22.)

   Set down, too, the circumstances of his choice. He was not obliged to
   choose as he did. None compelled him to take such a course. The things
   he took up did not force themselves upon him against his will. He went
   after them; they did not come after him. All that he did, he did of his
   own free choice--voluntarily, and of his own accord.

   And then judge whether it is not true that his choices were as
   wonderful as his refusals. Since the world began, I suppose, none ever
   made such a choice as Moses did in our text.

   III. And now let me go on to a third thing:--let me speak of the
   principle which moved Moses, and made him do as he did.

   How can this conduct of his be accounted for? What possible reason can
   be given for it? To refuse that which is generally called good, to
   choose that which is commonly thought evil, this is not the way of
   flesh and blood. This is not the manner of man; this requires some
   explanation. What will that explanation be?

   We have the answer in the text. I know not whether its greatness or its
   simplicity is more to be admired. It all lies in one little word, and
   that word is "faith."

   Moses had faith. Faith was the mainspring of his wonderful conduct.
   Faith made him do as he did, choose what he chose, and refuse what he
   refused. He did it all because he believed.

   God set before the eyes of his mind His own will and purpose. God
   revealed to him that a Saviour was to be born of the stock of Israel,
   that mighty promises were bound up in these children of Abraham, and
   yet to be fulfilled, that the time for fulfilling a portion of these
   promises was at hand; and Moses put credit in this, and believed. And
   every step in his wonderful career, every action in his journey through
   life after leaving Pharaoh's court--his choice of seeming evil, his
   refusal of seeming good--all, all must be traced up to this fountain;
   all will be found to rest on this foundation. God had spoken to him,
   and he had faith in God's word.

   He believed that God would keep His promises--that what He had said He
   would surely do, and what He had covenanted He would surely perform.

   He believed that with God nothing was impossible. Reason and sense
   might say that the deliverance of Israel was out of the question: the
   obstacles were too many, the difficulties too great. But faith told
   Moses that God was all-sufficient. God had undertaken the work, and it
   would be done.

   He believed that God was all wise. Reason and sense might tell him that
   his line of action was absurd; that he was throwing away useful
   influence, and destroying all chance of benefiting his people, by
   breaking with Pharaoh's daughter. But faith told Moses that if God said
   "Go this way," it must be the best.

   He believed that God was all merciful. Reason and sense might hint that
   a more pleasant manner of deliverance might be found, that some
   compromise might be effected, and many hardships be avoided. But faith
   told Moses that God was love, and would not give His people one drop of
   bitterness beyond what was absolutely needed.

   Faith was a telescope to Moses. It made him see the goodly land afar
   off--rest, peace, and victory, when dim-sighted reason could only see
   trial and barrenness, storm and tempest, weariness and pain,

   Faith was an interpreter to Moses. It made him pick out a comfortable
   meaning in the dark commands of God's handwriting, while ignorant sense
   could see nothing in it but mystery and foolishness.

   Faith told Moses that all this rank and greatness was of the earth,
   earthy, a poor, vain, empty thing, frail, fleeting, and passing away;
   and that there was no true greatness like that of serving God. He was
   the king, he the true nobleman who belonged to the family of God. It
   was better to be last in heaven than first in hell.

   Faith told Moses that worldly pleasures were "pleasures of sin." They
   were mingled with sin, they led on to sin, they were ruinous to the
   soul, and displeasing to God. It would be small comfort to have
   pleasure while God was against him. Better suffer and obey God, than be
   at ease and sin.

   Faith told Moses that these pleasures after all were only for a
   "season." They could not last; they were all short-lived; they would
   weary him soon; he must leave them all in a few years.

   Faith told him that there was a reward in heaven for the believer far
   richer than the treasures in Egypt, durable riches, where rust could
   not corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal. The crown there would
   be incorruptible; the weight of glory would be exceeding and
   eternal;--and faith bade him look away to an unseen heaven if his eyes
   were dazzled with Egyptian gold.

   Faith told Moses that affliction and suffering were not real
   evils.--They were the school of God, in which He trains the children of
   grace for glory--the medicines which are needful to purify our corrupt
   wills--the furnace which must burn away our dross--the knife which must
   cut the ties that bind us to the world.

   Faith told Moses that the despised Israelites were the chosen people of
   God. He believed that to them belonged the adoption, and the covenant,
   and the promises, and the glory; that of them the seed of the woman was
   one day to be born, who should bruise the serpent's head; that the
   special blessing of God was upon them; that they were lovely and
   beautiful in His eyes--and that it was better to be a doorkeeper among
   the people of God than to reign in the palaces of wickedness.

   Faith told Moses that all the reproach and scorn poured out on him was
   "the reproach of Christ";--that it was honourable to be mocked and
   despised for Christ's sake--that whoso persecuted Christ's people was
   persecuting Christ Himself--and that the day must come when His enemies
   would bow before Him and lick the dust. All this, and much more, of
   which I cannot speak particularly, Moses saw by faith. These were the
   things he believed, and believing, did what he did. He was persuaded of
   them, and embraced them--he reckoned them as certainties--he regarded
   them as substantial verities--he counted them as sure as if he had seen
   them with his own eyes--he acted on them as realities--and this made
   him the man that he was. He had faith. He believed.

   Marvel not that he refused greatness, riches, and pleasure.--He looked
   far forward. He saw with the eye of faith kingdoms crumbling into
   dust--riches taking to themselves wings and fleeing away--pleasures
   leading on to death and judgment--and Christ only and His little flock
   enduring for ever.

   Wonder not that he chose affliction, a despised people, and
   reproach.--He beheld things below the surface. He saw with the eye of
   faith affliction lasting but for a moment--reproach rolled away, and
   ending in everlasting honour--and the despised people of God reigning
   as kings with Christ in glory.

   And was he not right? Does he not speak to us, though dead, this very
   day? The name of Pharaoh's daughter has perished, or at any rate is
   extremely doubtful.--The city where Pharaoh reigned is not known.--The
   treasures in Egypt are gone.--But the name of Moses is known wherever
   the Bible is read, and is still a standing witness that "whoso liveth
   by faith, happy is he."

   IV. And now let me wind up all by trying to set forth in order some
   practical lessons, which appear to me to follow, as legitimate
   consequences, from this history of Moses.

   What has all this to do with us? some men will say. We do not live in
   Egypt--we have seen no miracles--we are not Israelites--we are weary of
   the subject.

   Stay a little, if this be the thought of your heart, and by God's help
   I will show you that all may learn here, and all may be instructed. He
   that would live a Christian life, and be a really holy man, let him
   mark the history of Moses and get wisdom.

   (1) For one thing, if you would ever be saved, you must make the choice
   that Moses made--you must choose God before the world.

   Mark well what I say. Do not overlook this, though all the rest be
   forgotten. I do not say that the statesman must throw up his office,
   and the rich man forsake his property. Let no one fancy that I mean
   this. But I say, if a man would be saved, whatever be his rank in life,
   he must be prepared for tribulation. He must make up his mind to choose
   much which seems evil, and to give up and refuse much which seems good.

   I dare say this sounds strange language to some who read these pages. I
   know well you may have a certain form of religion, and find no trouble
   in your way. There is a common, worldly kind of Christianity in this
   day, which many have, and think they have enough--a cheap Christianity
   which offends nobody, and is worth nothing. I am not speaking of
   religion of this kind.

   But if you really are in earnest about your soul--if your religion is
   something more than a mere fashionable Sunday cloak--if you are
   determined to live by the Bible--if you are resolved to be a New
   Testament Christian, then, I repeat, you will soon find you must carry
   a cross.--You must endure hard things, you must suffer on behalf of
   your soul, as Moses did, or you cannot be saved.

   The world in the nineteenth century is what it always was. The hearts
   of men are still the same. The offence of the cross is not ceased.
   God's true people are still a despised little flock. True Evangelical
   religion still brings with it reproach and scorn. A real servant of God
   will still be thought by many a weak enthusiast and a fool.

   But the matter comes to this. Do you wish your soul to be saved? Then
   remember, you must choose whom you will serve. You cannot serve God and
   mammon. You cannot be on two sides at once. You cannot be a friend of
   Christ and a friend of the world at the same time. You must come out
   from the children of this world, and be separate; you must put up with
   much ridicule, trouble, and opposition, or you will be lost for ever.
   You must be willing to think and do things which the world considers
   foolish, and to hold opinions which are only held by a few. It will
   cost you something. The stream is strong, and you have to stem it. The
   way is narrow and steep, and it is no use saying it is not. But depend
   on it, there can be no saving religion without sacrifices and
   self-denial.

   Now are you making any sacrifices? Does your religion cost you
   anything? I put it to your conscience in all affection and
   tenderness.--Are you, like Moses, preferring God to the world, or not?
   I beseech you not to take shelter under that dangerous word "we": "we
   ought," and "we hope," and "we mean," and the like. I ask you plainly,
   What are you doing yourself? Are you willing to give up anything which
   keeps you back from God? or are you clinging to the Egypt of the world,
   and saying to yourself, "I must have it, I must have it: I cannot tear
   myself away"? Is there any cross in your Christianity? Are there any
   sharp corners in your religion, anything that ever jars and comes in
   collision with the earthly-mindedness around you? or is all smooth and
   rounded-off, and comfortably fitted into custom and fashion? Do you
   know anything of the afflictions of the Gospel? Is your faith and
   practice ever a subject of scorn and reproach? Are you thought a fool
   by anyone because of your soul? Have you left Pharaoh's daughter, and
   heartily joined the people of God? Are you venturing all on Christ?
   Search and see.

   These are hard inquiries and rough questions. I cannot help it. I
   believe they are founded on Scripture truths. I remember it is written,
   "There went great multitudes with Jesus, and He turned, and said unto
   them, If any man come to Me and hate not his father, and mother, and
   wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life,
   also, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever doth not bear his cross,
   and come after Me, cannot be my disciple." (Luke xiv. 25-27.) Many, I
   fear, would like glory, who have no wish for grace. They would fain
   have the wages, but not the work; the harvest, but not the labour; the
   reaping, but not the sowing; the reward, but not the battle. But it may
   not be. As Bunyan says, "the bitter must go before the sweet." If there
   is no cross, there will be no crown.

   (2) The second thing I say is this--nothing mil ever enable you to
   choose God before the world, except faith.

   Nothing else will do it. Knowledge will not, feeling will not, a
   regular use of outward forms will not, good companions will not. All
   these may do something, but the fruit they produce has no power of
   continuance: it will not last. A religion springing from such sources
   will only endure so long as there is no "tribulation of persecution
   because of the Word"; but as soon as there is any, it will dry up. It
   is a clock without mainspring or weights; its face may be beautiful,
   you may turn its fingers round, but it will not go. A religion that is
   to stand must have a living foundation, and there is none other but
   faith.

   There must be a real heartfelt belief that God's promises are sure and
   to be depended on; a real belief that what God says in the Bible is all
   true, and that every doctrine contrary to this is false, whatever
   anyone may say. There must be a real belief that all God's words are to
   be received, however hard and disagreeable to flesh and blood, and that
   His way is right and all others wrong. This there must be, or you will
   never come out from the world, take up the cross, follow Christ, and be
   saved.

   You must learn to believe promises better than possessions; things
   unseen better than things seen; things in heaven out of sight better
   than things on earth before your eyes; the praise of the invisible God
   better than the praise of visible man. Then, and then only, you will
   make a choice like Moses, and prefer God to the world.

   Now I ask every reader of this paper, have you got this faith? If you
   have, you will find it possible to refuse seeming good, and choose
   seeming evil.--You will think nothing of to-day's losses, in the hope
   of to-morrow's gains.--You will follow Christ in the dark, and stand by
   Him to the very last. If you have not, I warn you, you will never war a
   good warfare, and "so run as to obtain."--You will soon be offended and
   turn back to the world.

   Above all this there must be a real abiding faith in the Lord Jesus
   Christ. The life that you live in the flesh you must live by faith of
   the Son of God. There must be a settled habit of continually leaning on
   Jesus, looking unto Jesus, drawing out of Jesus, and using Him as the
   manna of your soul. You must strive to be able to say, "To me to live
   is Christ." "I can do all things through Christ which strengthened me."
   (Philip. i. 21; iv. 13.)

   This was the faith by which the old saints obtained a good report. This
   was the weapon by which they overcame the world. This made them what
   they were.

   This was the faith that made Noah go on building Ms ark, while the
   world looked on and mocked--and Abraham give the choice of the land to
   Lot, and dwell on quietly in tents--and Ruth cleave to Naomi, and turn
   away from her country and her gods--and Daniel continue in prayer,
   though he knew the lions' den was prepared--and the three children
   refuse to worship idols, though the fiery furnace was before their
   eyes--and Moses forsake Egypt, not fearing the wrath of Pharaoh. All
   these acted as they did because they believed. They saw the
   difficulties and troubles of this course. But they saw Jesus by faith
   above them all, and they pressed on. Well may the Apostle Peter speak
   of faith as "precious faith." (2 Peter i. 1.)

   (3) The third thing I say is this--the true reason why so many are
   worldly and ungodly persons is that they have no faith.

   We must be aware that multitudes of professing Christians would never
   think for a moment of doing as Moses did. It is useless to speak smooth
   things, and shut your eyes to the fact. That man must be blind who does
   not see thousands around him who are daily preferring the world to
   God--placing the things of time before the things of eternity, and the
   things of the body before the things of the soul. We may not like to
   admit this, and we try hard to blink the fact. But so it is.

   And why do they do so? No doubt they will all give us reasons and
   excuses. Some will talk of the snares of the world--some of the want of
   time--some of the peculiar difficulties of their position--some of the
   cares and anxieties of life, some of the strength of temptation--some
   of the power of passions--some of the effects of bad companions. But
   what does it come to after all? There is a far shorter way to account
   for the state of their souls--they do not believe. One simple sentence,
   like Aaron's rod, will swallow up all their excuses--they have no
   faith.

   They do not really think what God says is true. They secretly flatter
   themselves with the notion, "It will surely not be fulfilled--there
   must surely be some other way to heaven beside that which ministers
   speak of--there cannot surely be so much danger of being lost." In
   short, they do not put implicit confidence in the words that God has
   written and spoken, and so do not act upon them. They do not thoroughly
   believe hell, and so do not flee from it--nor heaven, and so do not
   seek it--nor the guilt of sin, and so do not turn from it--nor the
   holiness of God, and so do not fear Him--nor their need of Christ, and
   so do not trust in Him, nor love Him. They do not feel confidence in
   God, and so venture nothing for Him. Like the boy Passion, in Pilgrim's
   Progress, they must have their good things now. They do not trust God,
   and so they cannot wait.

   Now how is it with ourselves? Do we believe all the Bible? Let us ask
   ourselves that question. Depend on it, it is a much greater thing to
   believe all the Bible than many suppose. Happy is the man who can lay
   his hand on his heart and say, "I am a believer."

   We talk of infidels sometimes as if they were the rarest people in the
   world. And I grant that open avowed infidelity is happily not very
   common now. But there is a vast amount of practical infidelity around
   us, for all that, which is as dangerous in the end as the principles of
   Voltaire and Paine. There are many who Sunday after Sunday repeat the
   creed, and make a point of declaring their belief in all that the
   Apostolic and Nicene forms contain. And yet these very persons will
   live all the week as if Christ had never died, and as if there were no
   judgment, and no resurrection of the dead, and no life everlasting at
   all. There are many who will say, "Oh, we know it all," when spoken to
   about eternal things and the value of their souls. And yet their lives
   show plainly they know not anything as they ought to know; and the
   saddest part of their state is that they think they do!

   It is an awful truth, and worthy of all consideration, that knowledge
   not acted upon, in God's sight, is not merely useless and unprofitable.
   It is much worse than that. It will add to our condemnation and
   increase our guilt in the judgment day. A faith that does not influence
   a man's practice is not worthy of the name. There are only two classes
   in the Church of Christ--those who believe and those who do not. The
   difference between the true Christian and the mere outward professor
   just lies in one word--the true Christian is like Moses, "He has
   faith"; the mere outward professor has none. The true Christian
   believes, and therefore lives as he does; the mere professor does not
   believe, and therefore is what he is. Oh, where is our faith? Let us
   not be faithless, but believing.

   (4) The last thing I say is this--the true secret of doing great things
   for God is to have great faith.

   I believe that we are all apt to err on this point. We think too much,
   and talk too much, about graces, and gifts, and attainments, and do not
   sufficiently remember that faith is the root and mother of them all. In
   walking with God, a man will go just as far as he believes, and no
   further. His life will always be proportioned to his faith. His peace,
   his patience, his courage, his seal, his works--all will be according
   to his faith.

   You read the lives of eminent Christians, of such men as Wesley, or
   Whitefield, or Venn, or Martyn, of Bickersteth, or Simeon, or M'Cheyne.
   And you are disposed to say, "What wonderful gifts and graces these men
   had!" I answer, you should rather give honour to the mother-grace which
   God puts forward in the eleventh chapter of the Epistle to the
   Hebrews--you should give honour to their faith. Depend on it, faith was
   the mainspring in the character of each and all.

   I can fancy someone saying, "They were so prayerful--that made them
   what they were." I answer, why did they pray much?--Simply because they
   had much faith. What is prayer, but faith speaking to God?

   Another perhaps will say, "They were so diligent and laborious--that
   accounts for their success." I answer, why were they so
   diligent?--Simply because they had faith. What is Christian diligence,
   but faith at work?

   Another will tell me, "They were so bold--that rendered them so
   useful." I answer, why were they so bold?--Simply because they had much
   faith. What is Christian boldness, but faith honestly doing its duty?

   And another will cry, "It was their holiness and spirituality--that
   gave them their weight." For the last time I answer, what made them
   holy?--Nothing but a living, realizing spirit of faith. What is
   holiness, but faith visible and faith incarnate?

   Now does any reader of this paper desire to grow in grace, and in the
   knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ? Would you bring forth much fruit?
   Would you be eminently holy and useful? Would you be bright, and shine
   as a light in your day? Would you, like Moses, make it clear as noonday
   that you have chosen God before the world? I dare be sure that every
   believer will reply, "Yes! yes! yes! these are the things we long for
   and desire."

   Then take the advice I give you this day--go and cry to the Lord Jesus
   Christ, as the disciples did, "Lord, increase our faith." Faith is the
   root of a real Christian's character. Let your root be right, and your
   fruit will soon abound. Your spiritual prosperity will always be
   according to your faith. He that believeth shall not only be saved, but
   shall never thirst--shall overcome--shall be established--shall walk
   firmly on the waters of this world--and shall do great works.

   Reader, if you believe the things contained in this paper, and desire
   to be a thoroughly holy man, begin to act on your belief. Take Moses
   for your example. Walk in his steps. Go and do likewise.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [40] In Eastern countries the liberty to adopt children who are not
   blood-relatives, and to give them the privileges of sons, is
   notoriously carried out most extensively.
     __________________________________________________________________

IX.
LOT

  A BEACON

   "He lingered."--Gen. xix. 16."

   THE Holy Scriptures, which were written for our learning, contain
   beacons as well as patterns. They show us examples of what we should
   avoid, as well as examples of what we should follow. The man whose name
   heads this page is set for a beacon to the whole Church of Christ. His
   character is put before us in one little word--"He lingered." Let us
   sit down and look at this beacon for a few minutes. Let us consider
   Lot.

   Who is this man that lingered?--It is the nephew of faithful Abraham.
   And when did he linger?--The very morning Sodom was to be destroyed.
   And where did he linger?--Within the walls of Sodom itself. And before
   whom did he linger?--Under the eyes of the two angels, who were sent to
   bring him out of the city. Even then "he lingered!"

   The words are solemn, and full of food for thought. They ought to sound
   like a trumpet in the ears of all who make any profession of religion.
   I trust they will make every reader of this paper think. Who knows but
   they are the very words your soul requires? The voice of the Lord Jesus
   commands you to "remember Lot's wife." (Luke xvii. 32.) The voice of
   one of His ministers invites you this day to remember Lot.

   Let me try to show--

   I. What Lot was himself;

   II. What the text already quoted tells you of him;

   III. What reasons may account for his lingering;

   IV. What kind of fruit his lingering brought forth.

   I ask the special attention of all who have reason to hope they are
   real Christians, and desire to live holy lives. Let it be a settled
   principle in our minds, if we follow holiness, that we must not
   "linger."

   Once more, I say, "Lot is a beacon."

   I. What was Lot?

   This is a most important point. If I leave it unnoticed, I shall
   perhaps miss that class of professing Christians I want especially to
   benefit. If I did not make it quite clear, many would perhaps say,
   after reading this paper, "Ah! Lot was a bad man--a poor, wicked, dark
   creature--an unconverted man--a child of this world!--no wonder he
   lingered."

   But mark now what I say. Lot was nothing of the kind. Lot was a true
   believer--a converted person--a real child of God--a justified soul--a
   righteous man.

   Has any one of my readers grace in his heart?--So also had Lot. Has any
   one of my readers a hope of salvation?--So also had Lot. Is any one of
   my readers a traveller in the narrow way which leads unto life?--So
   also was Lot.

   Let no one think this is only my private opinion--a mere arbitrary
   fancy of my own--a notion unsupported by Scripture. Let no one suppose
   I want him to believe it merely because I say it. The Holy Ghost has
   placed the matter beyond controversy, by calling him "just" and
   "righteous" (2 Peter ii. 7, 8), and has given us good evidence of the
   grace that was in him.

   One evidence is, that he lived in a wicked place, "seeing and hearing"
   evil all around him (2 Peter ii. 8), and yet was not wicked himself.
   Now to be a Daniel in Babylon--an Obadiah in Ahab's house--an Abijah in
   Jeroboam's family--a saint in Nero's court, and a "righteous man" in
   Sodom, a man must have the grace of God. Without grace it would be
   impossible.

   Another evidence is that he "vexed his soul with the unlawful deeds" he
   beheld around him. (2 Peter ii. 8.) He was wounded, grieved, pained,
   and hurt at the sight of sin. This was feeling like holy David, who
   says, "I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept
   not Thy word." "Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep
   not Thy law." (Psalm cxix. 136, 158.) This was feeling like St. Paul,
   who says, "I have great sorrow and continual heaviness in my heart--for
   my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh." (Rom. ix. 2, 3.)
   Nothing will account for this but the grace of God.

   Another evidence is that he "vexed his soul from day to day" with the
   unlawful deeds he saw. (2 Peter ii. 8.) He did not at length become
   cool and lukewarm about sin, as many do. Familiarity and habit did not
   take off the fine edge of his feelings, as too often is the case. Many
   a man is shocked and startled at the first sight of wickedness, and yet
   becomes at last so accustomed to see it, that he views it with
   comparative unconcern. This is especially the case with those who live
   in towns and cities, or with English people who travel on the
   Continent. Such persons often become utterly indifferent about
   Sabbath-breaking, and many forms of open sin. But it was not so with
   Lot. And this, again, is a great mark of the reality of his grace.

   Such an one was Lot--a just and righteous man, a man sealed and stamped
   as an heir of heaven by the Holy Ghost Himself.

   Before we pass on, let us remember that a true Christian may have many
   a blemish, many a defect, many an infirmity, and yet be a true
   Christian nevertheless. We do not despise gold because it is mixed with
   much dross. We must not undervalue grace because it is accompanied by
   much corruption. Read on, and you will find that Lot paid dearly for
   his "lingering." But do not forget, as you read, that Lot was a child
   of God.

   II. Let us pass on to the second thing I spoke of. What does the text,
   already quoted, tell us about Lot's behaviour?

   The words are wonderful and astounding: "He lingered."--The more we
   consider the time and circumstances, the more wonderful we shall think
   them.

   Lot knew the awful condition of the city in which he stood. "The cry"
   of its abominations "had waxen great before the Lord." (Gen. xix. 13.)
   And yet "he lingered."

   Lot knew the fearful judgment coming down on all within its walls. The
   angels had said plainly, "The Lord hath sent us to destroy it." (Gen.
   xix. 13.) And yet "he lingered."

   Lot knew that God was a God who always kept His word, and if He said a
   thing would surely do it. He could hardly be Abraham's nephew, and live
   long with him, and not be aware of this. Yet "he lingered."

   Lot believed there was danger--for he went to his sons-in-law, and
   warned them to flee. "Up!" he said, "Get you out of this place; for the
   Lord will destroy this city." (Gen. xix. 14.) And yet "he lingered."

   Lot saw the angels of God standing by, waiting for him and his family
   to go forth. He heard the voice of those ministers of wrath ringing in
   his ears to hasten him--"Arise! take thy wife and thy two daughters
   which are here; lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city."
   (Gen. xix. 15.) And yet "he lingered."

   He was slow when he should have been quick--backward when he should
   have been forward--trifling when he should have been
   hastening--loitering when he should have been hurrying--cold when he
   should have been hot. It is passing strange! It seems almost
   incredible! It appears too wonderful to be true! But the Spirit writes
   it down for our learning. And so it was.

   And yet, wonderful as it may appear at first sight, I fear there are
   many of the Lord Jesus Christ's people very like Lot.

   I ask every reader of this paper to mark well what I say. I repeat it
   that there may be no mistake about my meaning. I have shown you that
   Lot "lingered."--I say that there are many Christian men and Christian
   women in this day very like Lot.

   There are many real children of God who appear to know far more than
   they live up to, and see far more than they practise, and yet continue
   in this state for many years. Wonderful that they go as far as they do,
   and yet go no further!

   They acknowledge the Head, even Christ, and love the truth. They like
   sound preaching, and assent to every article of Gospel doctrine, when
   they hear it. But still there is an indescribable something which is
   not satisfactory about them. They are constantly doing things which
   disappoint the expectations of their ministers, and of more advanced
   Christian friends. Marvellous that they should think as they do, and
   yet stand still!

   They believe in heaven, and yet seem faintly to long for it; and in
   hell, and yet seem little to fear it, They love the Lord Jesus; but the
   work they do for Him is small. They hate the devil; but they often
   appear to tempt him to come to them. They know the time is short; but
   they live as if it were long. They know they have a battle to fight;
   yet a man might think they were at peace. They know they have a race to
   run; yet they often look like people sitting still. They know the Judge
   is at the door, and there is wrath to come; and yet they appear half
   asleep. Astonishing they should be what they are, and yet be nothing
   more!

   And what shall we say of these people? They often puzzle godly friends
   and relations. They often cause great anxiety. They often give rise to
   great doubts and searchings of heart. But they may be classed under one
   sweeping description: they are all brethren and sisters of Lot. They
   linger.

   These are they who get the notion into their minds that it is
   impossible for all believers to be so very holy and very spiritual!
   They allow that eminent holiness is a beautiful thing. They like to
   read about it in books, and even to see it occasionally in others. But
   they do not think that all are meant to aim at so high a standard. At
   any rate, they seem to make up their minds it is beyond their reach.

   These are they who get into their heads false ideas of charity, as they
   call it. They are morbidly afraid of being illiberal and narrow-minded,
   and are always flying into the opposite extreme. They would fain please
   everybody, and suit everybody, and be agreeable to everybody. But they
   forget they ought first to be sure that they please God.

   These are they who dread sacrifices, and shrink from self-denial. They
   never appear able to apply our Lord's command, to "take up the cross,"
   and "cut off the right hand and pluck out the right eye." (Matt. v. 29,
   30.) They cannot deny that our Lord used these expressions, but they
   never find a place for them in their religion. They spend their lives
   in trying to make the gate more wide, and the cross more light. But
   they never succeed.

   These are they who are always trying to keep in with the world. They
   are ingenious in discovering reasons for not separating decidedly, and
   in framing plausible excuses for attending questionable amusements, and
   keeping up questionable friendships. One day you are told of their
   attending a Bible-reading: the next day perhaps you hear of their going
   to a ball. One day they fast, or go to the Lord's table and receive the
   sacrament: another day they go to the race-course in the morning and
   the opera at night. One day they are almost in hysterics under the
   sermon of some sensational preacher: another day they are weeping over
   some novel. They are constantly labouring to persuade themselves that
   to mix a little with worldly people on their own ground does good. Yet
   in their case it is very clear they do no good, and only get harm.

   These are they who cannot find it in their hearts to quarrel with their
   besetting sin, whether it be sloth, indolence, ill-temper, pride,
   selfishness, impatience, or what it may. They allow it to remain a
   tolerably quiet and undisturbed tenant of their hearts. They say, "it
   is their health, or their constitutions, or their temperaments, or
   their trials, or their way. Their father, or mother, or grandmother,
   was so before themselves, and they are sure they cannot help it." And
   when you meet after the absence of a year or so, you hear the same
   thing!

   But all, all, all may be summed up in one single sentence. They are the
   brethren and sisters of Lot. They linger.

   Ah, if you are a lingering soul, you are not happy! You know you are
   not. It would be strange indeed if you were so. Lingering is the sure
   destruction of a happy Christianity. A lingerer's conscience forbids
   him to enjoy inward peace.

   Perhaps at one time you did run well. But you have left your first
   love--you have never felt the same comfort since, and you never will
   till you return to your "first works." (Rev. ii. 5.) Like Peter, when
   the Lord Jesus was taken prisoner, you are following the Lord afar off;
   and, like him, you will find the way not pleasant, but hard.

   Come and look at Lot. Come and mark Lot's history. Come and consider
   Lot's "lingering," and be wise.

   III. Let us next consider the reasons that may account for Lot's
   lingering.

   This is a question of great importance, and I ask most serious
   attention to it. To know the root of a disease is one step towards a
   remedy. He that is forewarned is forearmed.

   Who is there among the readers of this paper that feels secure, and has
   no fear of lingering? Come and listen while I tell you a few passages
   of Lot's history. Do as he did, and it will be a miracle indeed if you
   do not get into the same state of soul at last.

   One thing then I observe in Lot is this--he made a wrong choice in
   early life.

   There was a time when Abraham and Lot lived together. They both became
   rich, and could live together no longer. Abraham, the elder of the two,
   in the true spirit of humility and courtesy, gave Lot the choice of the
   country, when they resolved to part company: "If thou," he said, "wilt
   take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to
   the right hand, then I will go to the left." (Gen. xiii. 9.)

   And what did Lot do?--We are told he saw that the plains of Jordan,
   near Sodom, were rich, fertile, and well watered. It was a good land
   for cattle, and full of pastures. He had large flocks and herds, and it
   just suited his requirements. And this was the land he chose for a
   residence, simply because it was a rich, "well watered land." (Gen.
   xiii. 10.)

   It was near the town of Sodom! He cared not for that.--The men of
   Sodom, who would be his neighbours, were wicked! It mattered not.--They
   were sinners before God exceedingly! It made no difference to him.--The
   pasture was rich. The land was good. He wanted such a country for his
   flocks and herds. And before that argument all scruples and doubts, if
   indeed he had any, at once went down.

   He chose by sight, and not by faith. He asked no counsel of God, to
   preserve him from mistakes. He looked to the things of time, and not of
   eternity. He thought of his worldly profit, and not of his soul. He
   considered only what would help him in this life. He forgot the solemn
   business of the life to come. This was a bad beginning.

   But I observe also that Lot mixed with sinners when there was no
   occasion for his doing so.

   We are first told that he "pitched his tent toward Sodom." (Gen. xiii.
   12.) This, as I have already shown, was a great mistake.

   But the next time he is mentioned, we find him actually living in Sodom
   itself. The Spirit says expressly, "He dwelt in Sodom." (Gen. xiv. 12.)
   His tents were left. The country was forsaken. He occupied a house in
   the very streets of that wicked town.

   We are not told the reason of this change. We are not aware that any
   occasion could have arisen for it. We are sure there could have been no
   command of God. Perhaps his wife liked the town better than the
   country, for the sake of society. It is plain she had no grace herself.
   Perhaps she persuaded Lot it was needful for the advantage of his
   daughters, that they might marry, and get settled in life. Perhaps the
   daughters urged living in the town for the sake of gay company: they
   were evidently light-minded young women. Perhaps Lot liked it himself,
   in order to make more of his flocks and herds. Men never want reasons
   to confirm their wills. But one thing is very clear--Lot dwelt in the
   midst of Sodom without good cause.

   When a child of God does these two things which I have named, we never
   need be surprised if we hear, by and by, unfavourable accounts about
   his soul. We never need wonder if he becomes deaf to the warning voice
   of affliction, as Lot was (Gen. xiv. 12), and turns out a lingerer in
   the day of trial and danger, as Lot did.

   Make a wrong choice in life--an unscriptural choice--and settle
   yourself down unnecessarily in the midst of worldly people, and I know
   no surer way to damage your own spirituality, and to go backward about
   your eternal concerns. This is the way to make the pulse of your soul
   beat feebly and languidly. This is the way to make the edge of your
   feeling about sin become blunt and dull. This is the way to dim the
   eyes of your spiritual discernment, till you can scarcely distinguish
   good from evil, and stumble as you walk. This is the way to bring a
   moral palsy on your feet and limbs, and make you go tottering and
   trembling along the road to Zion, as if the grasshopper was a burden.
   This is the way to sell the pass to your worst enemy--to give the devil
   vantage-ground in the battle--to tie your arms in fighting--to fetter
   your legs in running--to dry up the sources of your strength--to
   cripple your energies--to cut off your own hair, like Samson, and give
   yourself into the hands of the Philistines, to put out your own eyes,
   grind at the mill, and become a slave.

   I call on every reader of this paper to mark well what I am saying.
   Settle these things down in your mind. Do not forget them. Recollect
   them in the morning. Recall them to memory at night. Let them sink down
   deeply into your heart. If ever you would be safe from "lingering,"
   beware of needless mingling with worldly people. Beware of Lot's
   choice! If you would not settle down into a dry, dull, sleepy, lazy,
   barren, heavy, carnal, stupid, torpid state of soul, beware of Lot's
   choice!

   (a) Remember this in choosing a dwelling-place, or residence. It is not
   enough that the house is comfortable--the situation good--the air
   fine--the neighbourhood pleasant--the rent or price small--the living
   cheap. There are other things yet to be considered. You must think of
   your immortal soul. Will the house you think of help you towards heaven
   or hell?--Is the Gospel preached within an easy distance?--Is Christ
   crucified within reach of your door?--Is there a real man of God near,
   who will watch over your soul? I charge you, if you love life, not to
   overlook this. Beware of Lot's choice.

   (b) Remember this in choosing a calling, a place, or profession in
   life. It is not enough that the salary is high--the wages good--the
   work light--the advantages numerous--the prospects of getting on most
   favourable. Think of your soul, your immortal soul. Will it be
   prospered or drawn back? Will you have your Sundays free, and be able
   to have one day in the week for your spiritual business? I beseech you,
   by the mercies of God, to take heed what you do. Make no rash decision.
   Look at the place in every light--the light of God as well as the light
   of the world. Gold may be bought too dear. Beware of Lot's choice.

   (c) Remember this in choosing a husband or wife, if you are unmarried.
   It is not enough that your eye is pleased--that your tastes are
   met--that your mind find congeniality--that there is amiability and
   affection--that there is a comfortable home for life.There needs
   something more than this. There is a life yet to come. Think of your
   soul, your immortal soul. Will it be helped upwards or dragged
   downwards by the union you are planning?--Will it be made more
   heavenly, or more earthly--drawn nearer to Christ, or to the
   world?--Will its religion grow in vigour, or will it decay?--I pray
   you, by all your hopes of glory, allow this to enter into your
   calculations. "Think," as old Baxter said, and "think, and think
   again," before you commit yourself. "Be not unequally yoked." (2 Cor.
   vi. 14.) Matrimony is nowhere named among the means of conversion.
   Remember Lot's choice.

   (d) Remember this, if you are ever offered a situation on a
   railway.--It is not enough to have good pay and regular employment--the
   confidence of the directors, and the best chance of rising to a higher
   post. These things are very well in their way, but they are not
   everything. How will your soul fare if you serve a railway company that
   runs Sunday trains? What day in the week will you have for God and
   eternity? What opportunities will you have for hearing the Gospel
   preached? I solemnly warn you to consider this. It will profit you
   nothing to fill your purse, if you bring leanness and poverty on your
   soul. Beware of selling your Sabbath for the sake of a good place!
   Remember Esau's mess of pottage. Beware of Lot's choice!

   Some reader may perhaps think, "A believer need not fear; he is a sheep
   of Christ, he will never perish, he cannot come to much harm. It cannot
   be that such small matters can be of great importance."

   Well, you may think so. But I warn you, if you neglect these matters,
   your soul will never prosper. A true believer will certainly not be
   cast away, although he may linger. But if he does linger, it is vain to
   suppose that his religion will thrive. Grace is a tender plant. Unless
   you cherish it and nurse it well, it will soon become sickly in this
   evil world. It may droop, though it cannot die. The brightest gold will
   soon become dim when exposed to a damp atmosphere. The hottest iron
   will soon become cold. It requires pains and toil to bring it to a red
   heat: it requires nothing but letting alone, or a little cold water to
   become black and hard.

   You may be an earnest, zealous Christian now. You may feel like David
   in his prosperity: "I shall never be moved." (Psalm xxx. 6.) But be not
   deceived. You have only got to walk in Lot's steps and make Lot's
   choice, and you will soon come to Lot's state of soul. Allow yourself
   to do as he did, presume to act as he acted, and be very sure you will
   soon discover you have become a wretched "lingerer" like him. You will
   find, like Samson, the presence of the Lord is no longer with you. You
   will prove, to your own shame, an undecided, hesitating man, in the day
   of trial. There will come a canker on your religion, and eat out its
   vitality without your knowing it. There will come a slow consumption on
   your spiritual strength, and waste it away insensibly. And at length
   you will wake up to find your hands hardly able to do the Lord's work,
   and your feet hardly able to carry you along the Lord's way, and your
   faith no bigger than a grain of mustard seed; and this, perhaps, at
   some turning point in your life, at a time when the enemy is coming in
   like a flood, and your need is the sorest.

   Ah, if you would not become a lingerer in religion, consider these
   things! Beware of doing what Lot did!

   IV. Let us inquire now what kind of fruit Lot's lingering spirit bore
   at last.

   I would not pass over this point for many reasons, and especially in
   the present day. There are not a few who will feel disposed to say,
   "After all, Lot was saved: he was justified--he got to heaven. I want
   no more. If I do but get to heaven, I shall be content." If this be the
   thought of your heart, just stay a moment, and listen to me a little
   longer. I will show you one or two things in Lot's history which
   deserve attention, and may perhaps induce you to alter your mind.

   I think it of first importance to dwell upon this subject. I always
   will contend that eminent holiness and eminent usefulness are most
   closely connected--that happiness and "following the Lord fully" go
   side by side--and that if believers will linger, they must not expect
   to be useful in their day and generation, or to be very saintly and
   Christlike, or to enjoy great comfort and peace in believing,

   (a) Let us mark, then, for one thing, that Lot did no good among the
   inhabitants of Sodom.

   Lot probably lived in Sodom many years. No doubt he had many precious
   opportunities for speaking of the things of God, and trying to turn
   away souls from sin. But Lot seems to have effected just nothing at
   all. He appears to have had no weight or influence with the people who
   lived around him. He possessed none of that respect and reverence which
   even the men of the world will frequently concede to a bright servant
   of God.

   Not one righteous person could be found in all Sodom, outside the walls
   of Lot's home. Not one of his neighbours believed his testimony. Not
   one of his acquaintances honoured the Lord whom he worshipped. Not one
   of his servants served his master's God. Not one of "all the people
   from every quarter" cared a jot for his opinion when he tried to
   restrain their wickedness. "This one fellow came in to sojourn," said
   they, "and he will needs be a judge." (Gen. xix. 9.) His life carried
   no weight; his words were not listened to; his religion drew none to
   follow him.

   And, truly, I do not wonder! As a general rule, lingering souls do no
   good to the world and bring no credit to God's cause. Their salt has
   too little savour to season the corruption around them. They are not
   "Epistles of Christ" who can be "known and read of all." (2 Cor. iii.
   2.) There is nothing magnetic, and attractive, and Christ-reflecting
   about their ways. Let us remember this.

   (b) Let us mark, for another thing, that Lot helped none of his family,
   relatives^ or connections towards heaven.

   We are not told how large his family was. But this we know--he had a
   wife and two daughters at least, in the day he was called out of Sodom,
   if he had not more children besides.

   But whether Lot's family was large or small, one thing, I think, is
   perfectly clear--there was not one among them all that feared God!

   When he "went out and spake to his sons-in-law, which married his
   daughters," and warned them to flee from the judgments coming on Sodom,
   we are told, "he seemed to them as one that mocked." (Gen. xix. 14.)
   What fearful words those are! It was as good as saying, "Who cares for
   anything you say?" So long as the world stands, those things will be a
   painful proof of the contempt with which a "lingerer" in religion is
   regarded.

   And what was Lot's wife? She left the city in his company, but she did
   not go far. She had not faith to see the need of such a speedy flight.
   She left her heart in Sodom when she began to flee. She looked back
   from behind her husband, in spite of the plainest" command not to do so
   (Gen. xix. 17), and was at once turned into a pillar of salt.

   And what were Lot's two daughters? They escaped, indeed, but only to do
   the devil's work. They became their father's tempters to wickedness,
   and led him to commit the foulest of sins.

   In short, Lot seems to have stood alone in his family! He was not made
   the means of keeping one soul back from the gates of hell!

   And I do not wonder. Lingering souls are seen through by their own
   families; and, when seen through, they are despised. Their nearest
   relatives understand inconsistency, if they understand nothing else in
   religion. They draw the sad, but not unnatural, conclusion, "Surely, if
   he believed all he professes to believe, he would not go on as he
   does." Lingering parents seldom have godly children. The eye of the
   child drinks in far more than the ear. A child will always observe what
   you do much more than what you say. Let us remember this.

   (c) Let us mark, for a third thing, that Lot left no evidences Mind him
   when he died.

   We know but little about Lot after his flight from Sodom, and all that
   we do know is unsatisfactory.

   His pleading for Zoar, because it was "a little one,"--his departure
   from Zoar afterwards--and his conduct in the cave--all, all tell the
   same story. All show the weakness of the grace that was in him, and how
   low the state of soul into which he had fallen.

   We know not how long he lived after his escape. We know not where he
   died, or when he died--whether he saw Abraham again--what was the
   manner of his death--what he said or what he thought. All these are
   hidden things. We are told of the last days of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
   Joseph, David--but not one word about Lot. Oh, what a gloomy deathbed
   the deathbed of Lot must have been!

   The Scripture appears to draw a veil around him on purpose. There is a
   painful silence about his latter end. He seems to go out like an
   expiring lamp, and to leave an ill-savour behind him. And had we not
   been specially told in the New Testament that Lot was "just" and
   "righteous," I verily believe we should have doubted whether Lot was a
   saved soul at all.

   But I do not wonder at his sad end. Lingering believers will generally
   reap according as they have sown. Their lingering often meets them when
   their spirit is departing. They have little peace at the last. They
   reach heaven, to be sure; but they reach it in poor plight, weary and
   footsore, in weakness and tears, in darkness and storm. They are saved,
   but "saved so as by fire." (1 Cor. iii. 15.)

   I ask every reader of this paper to consider the three things which I
   have just mentioned. Do not misunderstand my meaning. It is amazing to
   observe how readily people catch at the least excuse for
   misunderstanding the things that concern their souls!

   I do not tell you that believers who do not "linger" will, as a matter
   of course, be great instruments of usefulness to the world. Noah
   preached one hundred and twenty years, and none believed him. The Lord
   Jesus was not esteemed by His own people, the Jews.

   Nor yet do I tell you that believers who do not linger, will, as a
   matter of course, be the means of converting their families and
   relatives. David's children were, many of them, ungodly. The Lord Jesus
   was not believed on even by His own brethren.

   But I do say it is almost impossible not to see some connection between
   Lot's evil choice and Lot's lingering--and between Lot's lingering and
   his unprofitableness to his family and the world. I believe the Spirit
   meant us to see it. I believe the Spirit meant to make him a beacon to
   all professing Christians. And I am sure the lessons I have tried to
   draw from the whole history deserve serious reflection.

   And now let me speak a few parting words to all who read this paper,
   and especially to all who call themselves believers in Christ.

   I have no wish to make your hearts sad. I do not want to give you a
   gloomy view of the Christian course. My only object is to give you
   friendly warnings. I desire your peace and comfort. I would fain see
   you happy as well as safe--and joyful, as well as justified. I speak as
   I have done for your good.

   You live in days when a lingering, Lot-like religion abounds. The
   stream of profession is far broader than it once was, but far less deep
   in many places. A certain kind of Christianity is almost fashionable
   now. To belong to some party in the Church of England, and show a zeal
   for its interests--to talk about the leading controversies of the
   day--to buy popular religious books as fast as they come out, and lay
   them on your table--to attend meetings--to subscribe to Societies--to
   discuss the merits of preachers--to be enthusiastic and excited about
   every new form of sensational religion which crops up--all these are
   now comparatively easy and common attainments. They no longer make a
   person singular. They require little or no sacrifice. They entail no
   cross.

   But to walk closely with God--to be really spiritually-minded--to
   behave like strangers and pilgrims--to be distinct from the world in
   employment of time, in conversation, in amusements, in dress--to bear a
   faithful witness for Christ in all places--to leave a savour of our
   Master in every society--to be prayerful, humble, unselfish,
   good-tempered, quiet, easily pleased, charitable, patient, meek--to be
   jealously afraid of all manner of sin, and tremblingly alive to our
   danger from the world--these, these are still rare things! They are not
   common among those who are called true Christians, and, worst of all,
   the absence of them is not felt and bewailed as it should be.

   In a day like this I venture to offer counsel to every believing reader
   of this paper. Do not turn away from it. Do not be angry with me for
   plain speaking. I bid you "give diligence to make your calling and
   election sure," (2 Peter i. 10.) I bid you not to be slothful--not to
   be careless, not to be content with a small measure of grace--not be
   satisfied with being a little better than the world. I solemnly warn
   you not to attempt doing what never can be done--I mean, to serve
   Christ and yet keep in with the world. I call upon you, and beseech you
   to be a whole-hearted Christian, to follow after eminent holiness, to
   aim at a high degree of sanctification, to live a consecrated life, to
   present your body a "living sacrifice" unto God, to "walk in the
   spirit." (Rom. xii. 1; Gal. v. 25.) I charge you, and exhort you--by
   all your hopes of heaven and desires of glory, if you would be happy,
   if you would be useful--do not be a lingering soul.

   Would you know what the times demand?--The shaking of nations--the
   uprooting of ancient things--the overturning of kingdoms--the stir and
   restlessness of men's minds--what do they say? They all cry
   aloud--Christian! do not linger!

   Would you be found ready for Christ at His second appearing--your loins
   girded--your lamp burning--yourself bold, and prepared to meet Him?
   Then do not linger!

   Would you enjoy much sensible comfort in your religion--feel the
   witness of the Spirit within you--know whom you have believed--and not
   be a gloomy, complaining, sour, downcast, and melancholy Christian?
   Then do not linger!

   Would you enjoy strong assurance of your own salvation, in the day of
   sickness, and on the bed of death?--Would you see with the eye of faith
   heaven opening and Jesus rising to receive you? Then do not linger!

   Would you leave great broad evidences behind you when you are
   gone?--Would you like us to lay you in the grave with comfortable hope,
   and talk of your state after death without a doubt? Then do not linger!

   Would you be useful to the world in your day and generation?--Would you
   draw men from sin to Christ, adorn your doctrine, and make your
   Master's cause beautiful and attractive in their eyes? Then do not
   linger!

   Would you help your children and relatives towards heaven, and make
   them say, "We will go with you"?--and not make them infidels and
   despisers of all religion? Then do not linger!

   Would you have a great crown in the day of Christ's appearing, and not
   be the least and smallest star in glory, and not find yourself the last
   and lowest in the kingdom of God? Then do not linger!

   Oh, let not one of us linger! Time does not--death does not--judgment
   does not--the devil does not--the world does not. Neither let the
   children of God linger.

   Does any reader of this paper feel that he is a lingerer? Has your
   heart felt heavy, and your conscience sore, while you have been reading
   these pages? Does something within you whisper, "I am the man"? Then
   listen to what I am saying.--It is not well with your soul. Awake, and
   try to do better.

   If you are a lingerer, you must go to Christ at once and be cured.--You
   must use the old remedy; you must bathe in the old fountain. You must
   turn again to Christ and be healed. The way to do a thing is to do it.
   Do this at once!

   Think not for a moment your case is past recovery. Think not, because
   you have been long living in a dry, sleepy, and heavy state of soul,
   that there is no hope of revival. Is not the Lord Jesus Christ an
   appointed Physician for all spiritual ailments? Did He not cure every
   form of disease when He was upon earth? Did He not cast out every kind
   of devil? Did He not raise poor backsliding Peter, and put a new song
   in his mouth? Oh, doubt not, but earnestly believe that He will yet
   revive His work within you! Only return from lingering, and confess
   your folly, and come--come at once to Christ. Blessed are the words of
   the prophet: "Only acknowledge thine iniquity."--"Return, ye
   backsliding children, and I will heal your backsliding." (Jerem. iii.
   13, 22.)

   And let us all remember the souls of others, as well as our own. If at
   any time we see any brother or sister lingering, let us try to awaken
   them--try to arouse them--try to stir them up. Let us all "exhort one
   another" as we have opportunity. "Let us provoke unto love and good
   works." (Heb. iii. 13; x. 24.) Let us not be afraid to say to each
   other, "Brother, or sister, have you forgotten Lot? Awake! and remember
   Lot!--Awake, and linger no more."
     __________________________________________________________________

X.
A WOMAN TO BE REMEMBERED

   "Remember Lot's Wife."--Luke xvii. 32.

   THERE are few warnings in Scripture more solemn than that which heads
   this page. The Lord Jesus Christ says to us, "Remember Lot's wife."

   Lot's wife was a professor of religion: her husband was a "righteous
   man." (2 Peter ii. 8.) She left Sodom with him on the day when Sodom
   was destroyed; she looked back towards the city from behind her
   husband, against God's express command; she was struck dead at once,
   and turned into a pillar of salt. And the Lord Jesus Christ holds her
   up as a beacon to His Church: He says, "Remember Lot's wife."

   It is a solemn warning, when we think of the person Jesus names. He
   does not bid us remember Abraham, or Isaac, or Jacob, or Sarah, or
   Hannah, or Ruth. No: He singles out one whose soul was lost for ever.
   He cries to us, "Remember Lot's wife."

   It is a solemn warning, when we consider the subject Jesus is upon. He
   is speaking of His own second coming to judge the world: He is
   describing the awful state of unreadiness in which many will be found.
   The last days are on His mind, when He says, "Remember Lot's wife."

   It is a solemn warning, when we think of the person who gives it. The
   Lord Jesus is full of love, mercy, and compassion: He is one who will
   not break the bruised reed nor quench the smoking flax. He could weep
   over unbelieving Jerusalem, and pray for the men that crucified Him;
   yet even He thinks it good to remind us of lost souls. Even He says,
   "Remember Lot's wife."

   It is a solemn warning, when we think of the persons to whom it was
   first given. The Lord Jesus was speaking to His disciples: He was not
   addressing the scribes and Pharisees, who hated Him, but Peter, James,
   and John, and many others who loved Him; yet even to them He thinks it
   good to address a caution. Even to them He says, "Remember Lot's wife."

   It is a solemn warning, when we consider the manner in which it was
   given. He does not merely say, "Beware of following--take heed of
   imitating--do not be like Lot's wife." He uses a different word: He
   says, "Remember." He speaks as if we were all in danger of forgetting
   the subject; He stirs up our lazy memories; He bids us keep the case
   before our minds. He cries, "Remember Lot's wife."

   I propose to examine the lessons which Lot's wife is meant to teach us.
   I am sure that her history is full of useful instruction to the Church.
   The last days are upon us; the second coming of the Lord Jesus draws
   nigh; the danger of worldliness is yearly increasing in the Church. Let
   us be provided with safeguards and antidotes against the disease that
   is around us; and, not least, let us become familiar with the story of
   Lot's wife.

   There are three things which I shall do, in order to bring the subject
   before our minds in order.

   I. I will speak of the religious privileges which Lot's wife enjoyed.

   II. I will speak of the sin which Lot's wife committed.

   III. I will speak of the judgment which God inflicted upon her.

   I. I will first speak of the religious privileges which Lot's wife
   enjoyed.

   In the days of Abraham and Lot, true saving religion was scarce upon
   earth: there were no Bibles, no ministers, no churches, no tracts, no
   missionaries. The knowledge of God was confined to a few favoured
   families; the greater part of the inhabitants of the world were living
   in darkness, ignorance, superstition, and sin. Not one in a hundred
   perhaps had such good example, such spiritual society, such clear
   knowledge, such plain warnings as Lot's wife. Compared with millions of
   her fellow-creatures in her time, Lot's wife was a favoured woman.

   She had a godly man for her husband: she had Abraham, the father of the
   faithful, for her uncle by marriage. The faith, the knowledge, and the
   prayers of these two righteous men could have been no secret to her. It
   is impossible that she could have dwelt in tents with them for any
   length of time, without knowing whose they were and whom they served.
   Religion with them was no mere formal business; it was the ruling
   principle of their lives and the mainspring of all their actions. All
   this Lot's wife must have seen and known. This was no small privilege.

   When Abraham first received the promises, it is probable Lot's wife was
   there. When he built his altar by his tent between Hai and Bethel, it
   is probable she was there. When her husband was taken captive by
   Chedorlaomer, and delivered by God's interference, she was there. When
   Melchizedek, king of Salem, came forth to meet Abraham with bread and
   wine, she was there. When the angels came to Sodom and warned her
   husband to flee, she saw them; when they took them by the hand and led
   them out of the city, she was one of those whom they helped to escape.
   Once more, I say, these were no small privileges.

   Yet what good effect had all these privileges on the heart of Lot's
   wife? None at all. Notwithstanding all her opportunities and means of
   grace--notwithstanding all her special warnings and messages from
   heaven, she lived and died graceless, godless, impenitent, and
   unbelieving. The eyes of her understanding were never opened; her
   conscience was never really aroused and quickened; her will was never
   really brought into a state of obedience to God; her affections were
   never really set upon things above. The form of religion which she had
   was kept up for fashion's sake and not from feeling: it was a cloak
   worn for the sake of pleasing her company, but not from any sense of
   its value. She did as others did around her in Lot's house: she
   conformed to her husband's ways: she made no opposition to his
   religion: she allowed herself to be passively towed along in his wake:
   but all this time her heart was wrong in the sight of God. The world
   was in her heart, and her heart was in the world. In this state she
   lived, and in this state she died.

   In all this there is much to be learned: I see a lesson here which is
   of the deepest importance in the present day. You live in times when
   there are many persons just like Lot's wife: come and hear the lesson
   which her case is meant to teach.

   Learn, then, that the mere possession of religious privileges mil save
   no one's soul. You may have spiritual advantages of every description;
   you may live in the full sunshine of the richest opportunities and
   means of grace; you may enjoy the best of preaching and the choicest
   instruction; you may dwell in the midst of light, knowledge, holiness,
   and good company. All this may be, and yet you yourself may remain
   unconverted, and at last be lost for ever.

   I dare say this doctrine sounds hard to some readers. I know that many
   fancy they want nothing but religious privileges in order to become
   decided Christians. They are not what they ought to be at present, they
   allow; but their position is so hard, they plead, and their
   difficulties are so many. Give them a godly husband, or a godly
   wife--give them godly companions, or a godly master--give them the
   preaching of the Gospel--give them privileges, and then they would walk
   with God.

   It is all a mistake. It is an entire delusion. It requires something
   more than privileges to save souls. Joab was David's captain; Gehazi
   was Elisha's servant; Demas was Paul's companion; Judas Iscariot was
   Christ's disciple; and Lot had a worldly, unbelieving wife. These all
   died in their sins. They went down to the pit in spite of knowledge,
   warnings, and opportunities; and they all teach us that it is not
   privileges alone that men need. They need the grace of the Holy Ghost.

   Let us value religious privileges, but let us not rest entirely upon
   them. Let us desire to have the benefit of them in all our movements in
   life, but let us not put them in the place of Christ. Let us use them
   thankfully, if God grants them to us, but let us take care that they
   produce some fruit in our heart and life. If they do not do good, they
   often do positive harm: they sear the conscience, they increase
   responsibility, they aggravate condemnation. The same fire which melts
   the wax hardens the clay; the same sun which makes the living tree
   grow, dries up the dead tree, and prepares it for burning. Nothing so
   hardens the heart of man as a barren familiarity with sacred things.
   Once more I say, it is not privileges alone which make people
   Christians, but the grace of the Holy Ghost. Without that no man will
   ever be saved.

   I ask the members of Evangelical congregations, in the present day, to
   mark well what I am saying. You go to Mr. A's, or Mr. B's church: you
   think him an excellent preacher; you delight in his sermons; you cannot
   hear anyone else with the same comfort; you have learned many things
   since you attended his ministry; you consider it a great privilege to
   be one of his hearers! All this is very good. It is a privilege. I
   should be thankful if ministers like yours were multiplied a
   thousandfold. But after all, what have you got in your heart? Have you
   yet received the Holy Ghost? If not, you are no better than Lot's wife.

   I ask the servants of religious families to mark well what I am saying.
   It is a great privilege to live in a house where the fear of God
   reigns. It is a privilege to hear family prayers morning and evening,
   to hear the Word of God regularly expounded, to have a quiet Sunday,
   and to be able always to go to church. These are the things that you
   ought to seek after when you try to get a situation; these are the
   things which make a really good place. High wages and light work will
   never make up for a constant round of worldliness, Sabbath-breaking,
   and sin. But take heed that you do not rest content with these things:
   do not suppose because you have all these spiritual advantages, that
   you will of course go to heaven. You must have grace in your own heart,
   as well as attend family prayers. If not, you are at present no better
   than Lot's wife.

   I ask the children of religious parents to mark well what I am saying.
   It is the highest privilege to be the child of a godly father and
   mother, and to be brought up in the midst of many prayers. It is a
   blessed thing indeed to be taught the Gospel from our earliest infancy,
   and to hear of sin, and Jesus, and the Holy Spirit, and holiness, and
   heaven, from the first moment we can remember anything. But, oh, take
   heed that you do not remain barren and unfruitful in the sunshine of
   all these privileges: beware lest your heart remains hard, impenitent
   and worldly, notwithstanding the many advantages you enjoy. You cannot
   enter the kingdom of God on the credit of your parents' religion. You
   must eat the bread of life for yourself, and have the witness of the
   Spirit in your own heart. You must have repentance of your own, faith
   of your own, and sanctification of your own. If not, you are no better
   than Lot's wife.

   I pray God that all professing Christians, in these days, may lay these
   things to heart. May we never forget that privileges alone cannot save
   us. Light and knowledge, and faithful preaching, and abundant means of
   grace, and the company of holy people are all great blessings and
   advantages. Happy are they that have them! But, after all, there is one
   thing without which privileges are useless: that one thing is the grace
   of the Holy Ghost. Lot's wife had many privileges: but Lot's wife had
   no grace.

   II. I will next speak of the sin which Lot's wife committed.

   The history of her sin is given by the Holy Ghost in few and simple
   words--"She looked back from behind her husband, and she became a
   pillar of salt." We are told no more than this. There is a naked
   solemnity about the history. The sum and substance of her transgression
   lies in these three words, "She looked back."

   Does that sin seem small in the eyes of any reader of this paper? Does
   the fault of Lot's wife appear a trifling one to be visited with such a
   punishment? This is the feeling, I dare say, that rises in some hearts.
   Give your attention while I reason with you on the subject. There was
   far more in that look than strikes you at first sight: it implied far
   more than it expressed. Listen, and you shall hear.

   (a) That look was a little thing, but revealed the true character of
   Lot's wife. Little things will often show the state of a man's mind
   even better than great ones, and little symptoms are often the signs of
   deadly and incurable diseases. The apple that Eve ate was a little
   thing, but it proved that she had fallen from innocence and become a
   sinner. A crack in an arch seems a little thing, but it proves that the
   foundation is giving way, and the whole fabric is unsafe. A little
   cough in a morning seems an unimportant ailment, but it is often an
   evidence of failing in the constitution, and leads on to decline,
   consumption, and death. A straw may show which way the wind blows, and
   one look may show the rotten condition of a sinner's heart. (Matt. v.
   28.)

   (b) That look was a little thing, but it told of disobedience in Lot's
   wife. The command of the angel was strait and unmistakable: "Look not
   behind thee." (Gen. xix. 17.) This command Lot's wife refused to obey.
   But the Holy Ghost says, that "to obey is better than sacrifice," and
   that "rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft." (1 Sam. xv. 22, 23.) When
   God speaks plainly by His Word, or by His messengers, man's duty is
   clear.

   (c) That look was a little thing, but it told of proud unbelief in
   Lot's wife. She seemed to doubt whether God was really going to destroy
   Sodom: she appeared not to believe there was any danger, or any need
   for such hasty flight. But without faith it is impossible to please
   God. (Heb. xi. 6.) The moment a man begins to think he knows better
   than God, and that God does not mean anything when He threatens, his
   soul is in great danger. When we cannot see the reason of God's
   dealings, our duty is to hold our peace and believe.

   (d) That look was a little thing, but it told of secret love of the
   world in Lot's wife. Her heart was in Sodom, though her body was
   outside. She had left her affections behind when she fled from her
   home. Her eye turned to the place where her treasure was, as the
   compass-needle turns to the pole. And this was the crowning point of
   her sin. "The friendship of the world is enmity with God." (James iv.
   4.) "If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him."
   (1 John ii. 15.)

   I ask the special attention of my readers to this part of our subject.
   I believe it to be the part to which the Lord Jesus particularly
   intends to direct our minds. I believe He would have us observe that
   Lot's wife was lost by looking back to the world. Her profession was at
   one time fair and specious, but she never really gave up the world. She
   seemed at one time in the road to safety, but even then the lowest and
   deepest thoughts of her heart were for the world. The immense danger of
   worldliness is the grand lesson which the Lord Jesus means us to learn.
   Oh, that we may all have an eye to see and a heart to understand!

   I believe there never was a time when warnings against worldliness were
   so much needed by the Church of Christ as they are at the present day.
   Every age is said to have its own peculiar epidemic disease: the
   epidemic disease to which the souls of Christians are liable just now
   is the love of the world. It is a pestilence that walketh in darkness,
   and a sickness that destroyeth at noonday. It "hath cast down many
   wounded; yea, many strong men have been wounded by it." I would fain
   raise a warning voice, and try to arouse the slumbering consciences of
   all who make a profession of religion. I would fain cry aloud,
   "Remember the sin of Lot's wife." She was no murderess, no adulteress,
   no thief--but she was a professor of religion, and she looked back.

   There are thousands of baptized persons in our churches who are proof
   against immorality and infidelity, and yet fall victims to the love of
   the world. There are thousands who run well for a season, and seem to
   bid fair to reach heaven, but by and by give up the race, and turn
   their backs on Christ altogether. And what has stopped them? Have they
   found the Bible not true? Have they found the Lord Jesus fail to keep
   His word? No: not at all. But they have caught the epidemic disease:
   they are infected with the love of this world. I appeal to every
   true-hearted Evangelical minister who reads this paper: I ask him to
   look round his congregation. I appeal to every old-established
   Christian: I ask him to look round the circle of his acquaintance. I am
   sure that I am speaking the truth. I am sure that it is high time to
   remember the sin of Lot's wife.

   (a) How many children of religious families begin well and end ill! In
   the days of their childhood they seem full of religion. They can repeat
   texts and hymns in abundance; they have spiritual feel ings and
   convictions of sin; they profess to love the Lord Jesus and desire
   after heaven; they take pleasure in going to church and hearing
   sermons; they say things which are treasured up by their fond parents
   as indications of grace; they do things which make relations say, "What
   manner of child will this be?" But, alas, how often their goodness
   vanishes like the morning cloud, and like the dew that passes away! The
   boy becomes a young man, and cares for nothing but amusements,
   field-sports, revelling, and excess. The girl becomes a young woman,
   and cares for nothing but dress, gay company, novel-reading, and
   excitement. Where is the spirituality which once appeared to promise so
   fair? It is all gone: it is buried; it is overflowed by the love of the
   world. They walk in the steps of Lot's wife. They look back.

   (b) How many married people do well in religion to all appear ance,
   until their children begin to grow up--and then they fall away! In the
   early years of their married life they seem to follow Christ
   diligently, and to witness a good confession. They regularly attend the
   preaching of the Gospel: they are fruitful in good works; they are
   never seen in vain and dissipated society. Their faith and practice are
   both sound, and walk hand in hand. But, alas, how often a spiritual
   blight comes over the household when a young family begins to grow up,
   and sons and daughters have to be brought forward in life. A leaven of
   worldliness begins to appear in their habits, dress, entertainments,
   and employment of time. They are no longer strict about the company
   they keep and the places they visit. Where is the decided fine of
   separation which they once observed? Where is the unswerving abstinence
   from worldly amusements which once marked their course? It is all
   forgotten. It is all laid aside, like an old almanack. A change has
   come over them: the spirit of the world has taken possession of their
   hearts. They walk in the steps of Lot's wife. They look back.

   (c) How many young women seem to love decided religion until they are
   twenty or twenty-one, and then lose all! Up to this time of their life
   their conduct in religious matters is all that could be desired. They
   keep up habits of private prayer; they read their Bibles diligently;
   they visit the poor, when they have opportunity; they teach in Sunday
   schools, when there is an opening; they minister to the temporal and
   spiritual wants of the poor; they like religious friends; they love to
   talk on religious subjects: they write letters lull or religious
   expressions and religious experience. But, alas, how often they prove
   unstable as water, and are ruined by the love of the world! Little by
   little they fall away and lose their first love. Little by little the
   "things seen" push out of their minds the "things unseen," and, like
   the plague of locusts, eat up every green thing in their souls. Step by
   step they go back from the decided position they once took up. They
   cease to be jealous about sound doctrine; they pretend to find out that
   it is "uncharitable" to think one person has more religion than
   another; they discover it is "exclusive" to attempt any separation from
   the customs of society. By and by they give their affections to some
   man who makes no pretence to decided religion. At last they end by
   giving up the last remnant of their own Christianity, and becoming
   thorough children of the world. They walk in the steps of Lot's wife.
   They look back.

   (d) How many communicants in our churches were at one time zealous and
   earnest professors, and have now become torpid, formal, and cold! Time
   was when none seemed so much alive in religion as they were: none were
   so diligent in their attendance on the means of grace; none were so
   anxious to promote the cause of the Gospel, and so ready for every good
   work; none were so thank ful for spiritual instruction; none were
   apparently so desirous to grow in grace. But now, alas, everything
   seems altered! The "love of other things" has taken possession of their
   hearts, and choked the good seed of the Word. The money of the world,
   the rewards of the world, the literature of the world, the honours of
   the world, have now the first place in their affections. Talk to them,
   and you will find no response about spiritual things. Mark their daily
   conduct, and you will see no zeal about the kingdom of God. A religion
   they have indeed, but it is living religion no more. The spring of
   their former Christianity is dried up and gone; the fire of the
   spiritual machine is quenched and cold: earth has put out the flame
   which once burned so brightly. They have walked in the steps of Lot's
   wife. They have looked back.

   (e) How many clergymen work hard in their profession for a few years,
   and then become lazy and indolent from the love of this present world I
   At the outset of their ministry they seem willing to spend and be spent
   for Christ: they are instant in season and out of season; their
   preaching is lively and their churches are filled. Their congregations
   are well looked after: cottage lectures, prayer-meetings,
   house-to-house visitation, are their weekly delight. But, alas, how
   often after "beginning in the Spirit" they end "in the flesh," and,
   like Samson, are shorn of their strength in the lap of that Delilah,
   the world! They are preferred to some rich living; they marry a worldly
   wife; they are puffed up with pride, and neglect study and prayer. A
   nipping frost cuts off the spiritual blossoms which once bade so fair.
   Their preaching loses its unction and power; their week-day work
   becomes less and less; the society they mix in becomes less select; the
   tone of their conversation becomes more earthly. They cease to
   disregard the opinion of man: they imbibe a morbid fear of "extreme
   views," and are filled with a cautious dread of giving offence. And at
   last the man who at one time seemed likely to be a real successor of
   the apostles and a good soldier of Christ, settles down on his lees as
   a clerical gardener, farmer, or diner-out, by whom nobody is offended
   and nobody is saved. His church becomes half empty; his influence
   dwindles away; the world has bound him hand and foot. He has walked in
   the steps of Lot's wife. He has looked back. [41]

   It is sad to write of these things, but it is far more sad to see them.
   It is sad to observe how professing Christians can blind their
   consciences by specious arguments on this subject, and can defend
   positive worldliness by talking of the "duties of their station," the
   "courtesies of life," and the necessity of having a "cheerful
   religion."

   It is sad to see how many a gallant ship launches forth on the voyage
   of life with every prospect of success and, springing this leak of
   worldliness, goes down with all her freight in full view of the harbour
   of safety. It is saddest of all to observe how many flatter themselves
   it is all right with their souls when it is all wrong, by reason of
   this love of the world. Grey hairs are here and there upon them, and
   they know it not. They began with Jacob, and David, and Peter, and they
   are likely to end with Esau, and Saul, and Judas Iscariot. They began
   with Ruth, and Hannah, and Mary, and Persis, and they are likely to end
   with Lot's wife.

   Beware of a half-hearted religion. Beware of following Christ from any
   secondary motive--to please relations and friends--to keep in with the
   custom of the place or family in which you reside--to appear
   respectable and have the reputation of being religious. Follow Christ
   for His own sake, if you follow Him at all. Be thorough, be real, be
   honest, be sound, be whole-hearted. If you have any religion at all,
   let your religion be real. See that you do not sin the sin of Lot's
   wife.

   Beware of ever supposing that you may go too far in religion, and of
   secretly trying to keep in with the world. I want no reader of this
   paper to become a hermit, a monk, or a nun: I wish every one to do his
   real duty in that state of life to which he is called. But I do urge on
   every professing Christian who wishes to be happy, the immense
   importance of making no compromise between God and the world. Do not
   try to drive a hard bargain, as if you wanted to give Christ as little
   of your heart as possible, and to keep as much as possible of the
   things of this life. Beware lest you overreach yourself, and end by
   losing all. Love Christ with all your heart, and mind, and soul, and
   strength. Seek first the kingdom of God, and believe that then all
   other things shall be added to you. Take heed that you do not prove a
   copy of the character John Bunyan draws--Mr. Facing-both-ways. For your
   happiness' sake, for your usefulness' sake, for your safety's sake, for
   your soul's sake, beware of the sin of Lot's wife. Oh, it is a solemn
   saying of our Lord Jesus, "No man having put his hand to the plough and
   looking back is fit for the kingdom of God." (Luke ix. 62.)

   III. I will now speak, in the last place, of the punishment which God
   inflicted on Lot's wife.

   The Scripture describes her end in few and simple words. It is written
   that "she looked back and became a pillar of salt." A miracle was
   wrought to execute God's judgment on this guilty woman. The same
   Almighty hand which first gave her life, took that life away in the
   twinkling of an eye. From living flesh and blood she was turned into a
   pillar of salt.

   That was a fearful end for a soul to come to! To die at any time is a
   solemn thing. To die amidst kind friends and relations, to die calmly
   and quietly in one's bed, to die with the prayers of godly men still
   sounding in your ears, to die with a good hope through grace in the
   full assurance of salvation, leaning on the Lord Jesus, buoyed up by
   Gospel promises--to die even so, I say, is a serious business. But to
   die suddenly and in a moment, in the very act of sin, to die in full
   health and strength, to die by the direct interposition of an angry
   God--this is fearful indeed. Yet this was the end of Lot's wife. I
   cannot blame the prayer-book Litany, as some do, for retaining this
   petition, "From sudden death, good Lord, deliver us."

   That was a hopeless end for a soul to come to! There are cases where
   one hopes, as it were, against hope, about the souls of those we see go
   down to the grave. We try to persuade ourselves that our poor departed
   brother or sister may have repented unto salvation at the last moment,
   and laid hold on the hem of Christ's garment at the eleventh hour. We
   call to mind God's mercies; we remember the Spirit's power; we think on
   the case of the penitent thief; we whisper to ourselves, that saving
   work may have gone on even on that dying bed which the dying person had
   not strength to tell. But there is an end of all such hopes when a
   person is suddenly cut down in the very act of sin. Charity itself can
   say nothing when the soul has been summoned away in the very midst of
   wickedness, without even a moment's time for thought or prayer. Such
   was the end of Lot's wife. It was a hopeless end. She went to hell.

   But it is good for us all to mark these things. It is good to be
   reminded that God can punish sharply those who sin wilfully, and that
   great privileges misused bring down great wrath on the soul. Pharaoh
   saw all the miracles which Moses worked--Korah, Dathan, and Abiram had
   heard God speaking from Mount Sinai--Hophni and Phinehas were sons of
   God's High Priest--Saul lived in the full light of Samuel's
   ministry--Ahab was often warned by Elijah the prophet--Absalom enjoyed
   the privilege of being one of David's children--Belshazzar had Daniel
   the prophet hard by his door--Ananias and Sapphira joined the Church in
   the days when the apostles were working miracles--Judas Iscariot was a
   chosen companion of our Lord Jesus Christ Himself. But they all sinned
   with a high hand against light and knowledge; and they were all
   suddenly destroyed without remedy. They had no time or space for
   repentance. As they lived, so they died: as they were, they hurried
   away to meet God. They went with all their sins upon them, unpardoned,
   unrenewed, and utterly unfit for heaven. And being dead they yet speak.
   They tell us, like Lot's wife, that it is a perilous thing to sin
   against light, that God hates sin, and that there is a hell.

   I feel constrained to speak freely to my readers on the subject of
   hell. Suffer me to use the opportunity which the end of Lot's wife
   affords. I believe the time is come when it is a positive duty to speak
   plainly about the reality and eternity of hell. A flood of false
   doctrine has lately broken in upon us. Men are beginning to tell us
   "that God is too merciful to punish souls for ever--that there is a
   love of God lower even than hell--and that all mankind, however wicked
   and ungodly some of them may be, will sooner or later be saved." We are
   invited to leave the old paths of apostolic Christianity. We are told
   that the views of our fathers about hell, and the devil, and
   punishment, are obsolete and old-fashioned. We are to embrace what is
   called a "kinder theology," and treat hell as a Pagan fable, or a
   bugbear to frighten children and fools. Against such false teaching I
   desire, for one, to protest. Painful, sorrowful, distressing as the
   controversy may be, we must not blink it, or refuse to look the subject
   in the face. I, for one, am resolved to maintain the old position, and
   to assert the reality and eternity of hell.

   Believe me, this is no mere speculative question. It is not to be
   classed with disputes about liturgies and Church government. It is not
   to be ranked with mysterious problems, like the meaning of Ezekiel's
   temple or the symbols of Revelation. It is a question which lies at the
   very foundation of the whole Gospel. The moral attributes of God, His
   justice, His holiness, His purity, are all involved in it. The
   necessity of personal faith in Christ, and the sanctification of the
   Spirit, are all at stake. Once let the old doctrine about hell be
   overthrown, and the whole system of Christianity is unsettled,
   unscrewed, unpinned, and thrown into disorder.

   Believe me, the question is not one in which we are obliged to fall
   back on the theories and inventions of man. The Scripture has spoken
   plainly and fully on the subject of hell. I hold it to be impossible to
   deal honestly with the Bible, and to avoid the conclusions to which it
   will lead us on this point. If words mean anything, there is such a
   place as hell. If texts are to be interpreted fairly, there are those
   who will be cast into it. If language has any sense belonging to it,
   hell is for ever. I believe that the man who finds arguments for
   evading the evidence of the Bible on this question has arrived at a
   state of mind in which reasoning is useless. For my own part, it seems
   just as easy to argue that we do not exist, as to argue that the Bible
   does not teach the reality and eternity of hell.

   (a) Settle it firmly in your mind, that the same Bible which teaches
   that God in mercy and compassion sent Christ to die for sinners, does
   also teach that God hates sin, and must from His very nature punish all
   who cleave to sin, or refuse the salvation He has provided. The very
   same chapter which declares, "God so loved the world," declares also,
   that "the wrath of God abideth" on the unbeliever. (John iii. 16, 36.)
   The very same Gospel which is launched into the earth with the blessed
   tidings, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved," proclaims
   in the same breath, "He that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark xvi.
   16.)

   (b) Settle it firmly in your mind that God has given us proof upon
   proof in the Bible that He will punish the hardened and unbelieving,
   and that He can take vengeance on His enemies, as well as show mercy on
   the penitent. The drowning of the old world by the flood--the burning
   of Sodom and Gomorrah--the overthrow of Pharaoh and all his host in the
   Red Sea--the judgment on Korah, Dathan, and Abiram--the utter
   destruction of the seven nations of Canaan--all teach the same awful
   truth. They are all given to us as beacons, and signs, and warnings,
   that we may not provoke God. They are all meant to lift up the corner
   of the curtain which hangs over things to come, and to remind us that
   there is such a thing as the wrath of God. They all tell us plainly
   that "the wicked shall be turned into hell." (Psalm ix. 17.)

   (c) Settle it firmly in your mind, that the Lord Jesus Christ Himself
   has spoken most plainly about the reality and eternity of hell. The
   parable of the rich man and Lazarus contains things which should make
   men tremble. But it does not stand alone. No lips have used so many
   words to express the awfulness of hell, as the lips of Him who spake as
   never man spake, and who said "The word which ye hear is not Mine, but
   the Father's which sent Me." (John xiv. 24.) Hell, hell fire, the
   damnation of hell, eternal damnation, the resurrection of damnation,
   everlasting fire, the place of torment, destruction, outer darkness,
   the worm that never dies, the fire that is not quenched, the place of
   weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth, everlasting punishment--these,
   these are the words which the Lord Jesus Christ Himself employs. Away
   with the miserable nonsense which people talk in this day, who tell us
   that the ministers of the Gospel should never speak of hell! They only
   show their own ignorance, or their own dishonesty, when they talk in
   such a manner. No man can honestly read the four Gospels and fail to
   see that he who would follow the example of Christ must speak of hell.

   (d) Settle it, lastly, in your mind, that the comforting ideas which
   the Scripture gives us of heaven are at an end, if we once deny the
   reality or eternity of hell. Is there no future separate abode for
   those who die wicked and ungodly? Are all men, after death, to be
   mingled together in one confused multitude? Why then, heaven will be no
   heaven at all! It is utterly impossible for two to dwell happily
   together except they be agreed.--Is there to be a time when the term of
   hell and punishment will be over? Are the wicked after ages of misery
   to be admitted into heaven? Why then, the need of the sanctification of
   the Spirit is cast aside and despised! I read that men can be
   sanctified and made meet for heaven on earth: I read nothing of any
   sanctification in hell. Away with such baseless and unscriptural
   theories! The eternity of hell is as clearly affirmed in the Bible as
   the eternity of heaven. Once allow that hell is not eternal, and you
   may as well say that God and heaven are not eternal. The same Greek
   word which is used in the expression, "everlasting punishment," is the
   word that Is used by the Lord Jesus in the expression, "life eternal,"
   and by St. Paul in the expression, "everlasting God." (Matt. xxv. 46;
   Rom. xvi. 26.)

   I know that all this sounds dreadful in many ears. I do not wonder. But
   the only question we have to settle is this--Is it Scriptural? Is it
   true? I maintain firmly that it is so: and I maintain that professing
   Christians ought to be often reminded that they may be lost and go to
   hell.

   I know that it is easy to deny all plain teaching about hell, and to
   make it odious by invidious names. I have often heard of "narrow-minded
   views, and old-fashioned notions, and brimstone theology," and the
   like. I have often been told that "broad" views are wanted in the
   present day. I wish to be as broad as the Bible, neither less nor more.
   I say that he is the narrow-minded theologian, who pares down such
   parts of the Bible as the natural heart dislikes, and rejects any
   portion of the counsel of God.

   God knows that I never speak of hell without pain and sorrow. I would
   gladly offer the salvation of the Gospel to the very chief of sinners.
   I would willingly say to the vilest and most profligate of mankind on
   his deathbed, "Repent, and believe on Jesus, and thou shalt be saved."
   But God forbid that I should ever keep back from mortal man that
   Scripture reveals a hell as well as heaven, and that the Gospel teaches
   that men may be lost as well as saved. The watchman who keeps silent
   when he sees a fire, is guilty of gross neglect--the doctor who tells
   us we are getting well when we are dying, is a false friend; and the
   minister who keeps back hell from his people in his sermons is neither
   a faithful nor a charitable man.

   Where is the charity of keeping back any portion of God's truth? He is
   the kindest friend who tells me the whole extent of my danger. Where is
   the use of hiding the future from the impenitent and the ungodly?
   Surely it is like helping the devil, if we do not tell them plainly
   that "the soul that sinneth shall surely die." Who knows but the
   wretched carelessness of many baptized persons arises from this, that
   they have never been told plainly of hell? Who can tell but thousands
   might be converted, if ministers would urge them more faithfully to
   flee from the wrath to come? Verily, I fear we are many of us guilty in
   this matter: there is a morbid tenderness amongst us which is not the
   tenderness of Christ. We have spoken of mercy, but not of judgment; we
   have preached many sermons about heaven, but few about hell: we have
   been carried away by the wretched fear of being thought "low, vulgar
   and fanatical." We have forgotten that He who judgeth us is the Lord,
   and that the man who teaches the same doctrine that Christ taught
   cannot be wrong.

   If you would ever be a healthy Scriptural Christian, I entreat you to
   give hell a place in your theology. Establish it in your mind as a
   fixed principle, that God is a God of judgment, as well as of mercy;
   and that the same everlasting counsels which laid the foundation of the
   bliss of heaven, have also laid the foundation of the misery of hell.
   Keep in full view of your mind that all who die unpardoned and
   unrenewed, are utterly unfit for the presence of God and must be lost
   for ever. They are not capable of enjoying heaven: they could not be
   happy there. They must go to their own place: and that place is
   hell.--Oh, it is a great thing in these days of unbelief to believe the
   whole Bible!

   If you would ever be a healthy and Scriptural Christian, I entreat you
   to beware of any ministry which does not plainly teach the reality and
   eternity of hell. Such a ministry may be soothing and pleasant, but it
   is far more likely to lull you to sleep than to lead you to Christ, or
   build you up in the faith. It is impossible to leave out any portion of
   God's truth without spoiling the whole. That preaching is sadly
   defective which dwells exclusively on the mercies of God and the joys
   of heaven, and never sets forth the terrors of the Lord and the
   miseries of hell. It may be popular, but it is not Scriptural: it may
   amuse and gratify, but it will not save. Give me the preaching which
   keeps back nothing that God has revealed. You may call it stern and
   harsh; you may tell us that to frighten people is not the way to do
   them good. But you are forgetting that the grand object of the Gospel
   is to persuade men to "flee from the wrath to come," and that it is
   vain to expect men to flee unless they are afraid. Well would it be for
   many professing Christians if they were more afraid about their souls
   than they now are!

   If you desire to be a healthy Christian, consider often what your own
   end will be. Will it be happiness, or will it be misery? Will it be the
   death of the righteous, or will it be a death without hope, like that
   of Lot's wife? You cannot live always: there must be an end one day.
   The last sermon will one day be heard; the last prayer will one day be
   prayed; the last chapter in the Bible will one day be read--meaning,
   wishing, hoping, intending, resolving, doubting, hesitating--all will
   at length be over. You will have to leave this world and to stand
   before a holy God. Oh, that you would be wise! Oh, that you would
   consider your latter end!

   You cannot trifle for ever: a time will come when you must be serious.
   You cannot put off your soul's concerns for ever: a day will come when
   you must have a reckoning with God. You cannot be always singing, and
   dancing, and eating, and drinking, and dressing, and reading, and
   laughing, and jesting, and scheming, and planning, and money-making.
   The summer insects cannot always sport in the sunshine; the cold chilly
   evening will come at last, and stop their sport for ever. So will it be
   with you. You may put off religion now, and refuse the counsel of God's
   ministers: but the cool of the day is drawing on, when God will come
   down to speak with you. And what will your end be? Will it be a
   hopeless one, like that of Lot's wife?

   I beseech you, by the mercies of God, to look this question fairly in
   the face. I entreat you not to stifle conscience by vague hopes of
   God's mercy, while your heart cleaves to the world. I implore you not
   to drown convictions by childish fancies about God's love, while your
   daily ways and habits show plainly that "the love of the Father is not
   in you." There is mercy in God, like a river--but it is for the
   penitent believer in Christ Jesus. There is a love in God towards
   sinners which is unspeakable and unsearchable--but it is for those who
   "hear Christ's voice and follow Him." Seek to have an interest in that
   love. Break off every known sin; come out boldly from the world; cry
   mightily to God in prayer; cast yourself wholly and unreservedly on the
   Lord Jesus for time and eternity; lay aside every weight. Cling to
   nothing, however dear, which interferes with your soul's salvation;
   give up everything, however precious, which comes between you and
   heaven. This old shipwrecked world is fast sinking beneath your feet:
   the one thing needful is to have a place in the lifeboat and get safe
   to shore. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure.
   Whatever happens to your house and property, see that you make sure of
   heaven. Oh, better a million times be laughed at and thought extreme in
   this world than go down to hell from the midst of the congregation and
   end like Lot's wife!

   And now, let me conclude this paper by offering to all who read it, a
   few questions to impress the subject on their consciences. You have
   seen the history of Lot's wife--her privileges, her sin, and her end.
   You have been told of the uselessness of privileges without the gift of
   the Holy Ghost, of the danger of worldliness, and of the reality of
   hell. Suffer me to wind up all by a few direct appeals to your own
   heart. In a day of much light, and knowledge, and profession, I desire
   to set up a beacon to preserve souls from shipwreck. I would fain moor
   a buoy in the channel of all spiritual voyagers, and paint upon it,
   "Remember Lot's wife."

   (a) Are you careless about the second Advent of Christ? Alas, many are!
   They live like the men of Sodom, and the men of Noah's day: they eat,
   and drink, and plant, and build, and marry, and are given in marriage,
   and behave as if Christ was never going to return. If you are such an
   one, I say to you this day, Take care: "Remember Lot's wife."

   (b) Are you lukewarm, and cold in your Christianity? Alas, many are!
   They try to serve two masters: they labour to keep friends both with
   God and mammon. They strive to be a kind of spiritual bat, neither one
   thing nor the other: not quite a thorough-going Christian, but not
   quite men of the world. If you are such an one, I say to you this day,
   Take care: "Remember Lot's wife."

   (c) Are you halting between two opinions, and disposed to go back to
   the world? Alas, many are! They are afraid of the cross: they secretly
   dislike the trouble and reproach of decided religion. They are weary of
   the wilderness and the manna, and would fain return to Egypt, if they
   could. If you are such an one, I say to you this day, Take care:
   "Remember Lot's wife."

   (d) Are you secretly cherishing some besetting sin? Alas, many are!
   They go far in a profession of religion; they do many things that are
   right, and are very like the people of God. But there is always some
   darling evil habit, which they cannot tear from their heart. Hidden
   worldliness, or covetousness, or lust, sticks to them like their skin.
   They are willing to see all their idols broken, but this one. If you
   are such an one, I say to you this day, Take care: "Remember Lot's
   wife."

   (e) Are you trifling with little sins? Alas, many are! They hold the
   great essential doctrines of the Gospel. They keep clear of all gross
   profligacy, or open breach of God's law; but they are painfully
   careless about little inconsistencies, and painfully ready to make
   excuses for them. "It is only a little temper, or a little levity, or a
   little thoughtlessness, or a little forgetfulness"--they tell us: "God
   does not take account of such little matters. We are none of us
   perfect: God will never require it."--If you are such an one, I say to
   you this day, Take care: "Remember Lot's wife."

   (f) Are you resting on religious privileges? Alas, many do! They enjoy
   the opportunity of hearing the Gospel regularly preached, and of
   attending many ordinances, and means of grace: and they settle down on
   their lees. They seem to be "rich, and increased with goods, and have
   need of nothing" (Rev. iii. 17); while they have neither faith, nor
   grace, nor spiritual-mindedness nor meetness for heaven. If you are
   such an one, I say to you this day, Take care: "Remember Lot's wife."

   (g) Are you trusting to your religious knowledge? Alas, many do! They
   are not ignorant, as other men: they know the difference between true
   doctrine and false. They can dispute, they can reason, they can argue,
   they can quote texts; but all this time they are not converted, and
   they are yet dead in trespasses and sins. If you are such an one, I say
   to you this day, Take care: "Remember Lot's wife."

   (h) Are you making some profession of religion, and yet clinging to the
   world? Alas, many do! They aim at being thought Christians. They like
   the credit of being serious, steady, proper, regular, church-going
   people; yet all the while their dress, their tastes, their companions,
   their entertainments tell plainly they are of the world. If you are
   such an one, I say to you this day, Take care: "Remember Lot's wife."

   (i) Are you trusting that you will have a death-bed repentance? Alas,
   many do so! They know they are not what they ought to be: they are not
   yet born again, and fit to die. But they flatter themselves that when
   their last illness comes they shall have time to repent and lay hold on
   Christ, and go out of the world pardoned, sanctified, and meet for
   heaven. They forget that people often die very suddenly, and that as
   they live they generally die. If you are such an one, I say to you this
   day, Take care: Remember Lot's wife."

   (j) Do you belong to an Evangelical congregation? Many do, and, alas,
   go no further! They hear the truth Sunday after Sunday and remain as
   hard as the nether-millstone. Sermon after sermon sounds in their ears.
   Month after month they are invited to repent, to believe, to come to
   Christ, and to be saved. Year after year passes away, and they are not
   changed. They keep their seat under the teaching of a favourite
   minister, and they also keep their favourite sins. If you are such an
   one, I say to you this day, Take care: "Remember Lot's wife."

   Oh, may these solemn words of our Lord Jesus Christ be deeply graven on
   all our hearts! May they awaken us when we feel sleepy--revive us when
   we feel dead--sharpen us when we feel dull--warm us when we feel cold!
   May they prove a spur to quicken us when we are falling back, and a
   bridle to check us when we are turning side I May they be a shield to
   defend us when Satan casts a subtle temptation at our heart; and a
   sword to fight with, when he says boldly, "Give up Christ, come back to
   the world, and follow me!" Oh, may we say, in such hours of trial,
   "Soul, remember thy Saviour's warning! Soul, soul, hast thou forgotten
   His words? Soul, soul, REMEMBER LOT'S WIFE!'"
     __________________________________________________________________

   [41] "Remember Dr. Dodd! I myself heard him tell his own flock, whom he
   was lecturing in his house, that he was obliged to give up that method
   of helping their souls, because it exposed him to so much reproach. He
   gave it up, and fell from one compliance to another with his corrupt
   nature; and under what reproach did he die!" (He was hanged for
   forgery.) Venn's Life and Letters, p. 238. Edit. 1853.
     __________________________________________________________________

XI.
CHRIST'S GREATEST TROPHY

   "And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on Him, saying, If
   Thou be Christ, save Thyself and us.

   "But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear God,
   seeing thou art in the same condemnation?

   "And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but
   this Man hath done nothing amiss.

   "And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when Thou comest into Thy
   kingdom.

   "And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be
   with Me in paradise."--Luke xxiii. 39-43.

   there are few passages in the New Testament which are more familiar to
   men's ears than the verses which head this chapter. They contain the
   well-known story of "the penitent thief."

   And it is right and good that these verses should be well known. They
   have comforted many troubled minds; they have brought peace to many
   uneasy consciences; they have been a healing balm to many wounded
   hearts; they have been a medicine to many sin-sick souls; they have
   smoothed down not a few dying pillows. Wherever the Gospel of Christ is
   preached, they will always be honoured, loved, and had in remembrance.

   I wish to say something about these verses. I will try to unfold the
   leading lessons which they are meant to teach. I cannot see the
   peculiar mental state of anyone into whose hands this paper may fall.
   But I can see truths in this passage which no man can ever know too
   well. Here is the greatest trophy which Christ ever won.

   I. First of all, we are meant to learn from these verses, Christ's
   power and willingness to save sinners.

   This is the main doctrine to be gathered from the history of the
   penitent thief. It teaches us that which ought to be music in the ears
   of all who hear it--it teaches us that Jesus Christ is "mighty to
   save." (Isa. lxiii. 1.)

   I ask anyone to say whether a case could look more hopeless and
   desperate than that of this penitent thief once did?

   He was a wicked man--a malefactor--a thief, if not a murderer. We know
   this, for such only were crucified. He was suffering a just punishment
   for breaking the laws. And as he had lived wicked, so he seemed
   determined to die wicked--for at first, when he was crucified, he
   railed on our Lord.

   And he was a dying man. He hung there, nailed to a cross, from which he
   was never to come down alive. He had no longer power to stir hand or
   foot. His hours were numbered: the grave was ready for him. There was
   but a step between him and death.

   If ever there was a soul hovering on the brink of hell, it was the soul
   of this thief. If ever there was a case that seemed lost, gone, and
   past recovery, it was his. If ever there was a child of Adam whom the
   devil made sure of as his own, it was this man.

   But see now what happened. He ceased to rail and blaspheme, as he had
   done at the first: he began to speak in another manner altogether. He
   turned to our blessed Lord in prayer. He prayed Jesus to "remember him
   when he came into His kingdom." He asked that his soul might be cared
   for, his sins pardoned, and himself thought of in another world. Truly
   this was a wonderful change!

   And then mark what kind of answer he received. Some would have said he
   was too wicked a man to be saved; but it was not so. Some would have
   fancied it was too late: the door was shut, and there was no room for
   mercy; but it proved not too late at all. The Lord Jesus returned him
   an immediate answer--spoke kindly to him--assured him he should be with
   Him that day in paradise--pardoned him completely--cleansed him
   thoroughly from his sins--received him graciously--justified him
   freely--raised him from the gates of hell, gave him a title to glory.
   Of all the multitude of saved souls, none ever received so glorious an
   assurance of his own salvation as did this penitent thief. Go over the
   whole list, from Genesis to Revelation, and you will find none who had
   such words spoken to him as these--"To-day shalt thou be with Me in
   paradise."

   I believe the Lord Jesus never gave so complete a proof of His power
   and will to save, as He did upon this occasion. In the day when He
   seemed most weak, He showed that He was a strong deliverer. In the hour
   when His body was racked with pain, He showed that He could feel
   tenderly for others. At the time when He Himself was dying, He
   conferred on a sinner eternal life.

   Now, have I not a right to say, Christ is "able to save to the
   uttermost them that come unto God by Him"? (Heb. vii. 25.) Behold the
   proof of it. If ever sinner was too far gone to be saved, it was this
   thief. Yet he was plucked as a brand from the fire.

   Have I not a right to say, Christ will receive any poor sinner who
   comes to Him with the prayer of faith, and cast out none? Behold the
   proof of it. If ever there was one that seemed too bad to be received,
   this was the man. Yet the door of mercy was wide open even for him.

   Have I not a right to say, By grace ye may be saved through faith, not
   of works: fear not, only believe? Behold the proof of it. This thief
   was never baptized; he belonged to no visible Church; he never received
   the Lord's Supper; he never did any work for Christ; he never gave
   money to Christ's cause! But he had faith, and so he was saved.

   Have I not a right to say, The youngest faith will save a man's soul,
   if it only be true? Behold the proof of it. This man's faith was only
   one day old; but it led him to Christ, and preserved him from hell.

   Why then should any man or woman despair with such a passage as this in
   the Bible? Jesus is a Physician who can cure hopeless cases. He can
   quicken dead souls, and call the things which be not as though they
   were.

   Never should any man or woman despair! Jesus is still the same now that
   He was eighteen hundred years ago. The keys of death and hell are in
   His hand. When He opens none can shut. [42]

   What though your sins be more in number than the hairs of your head?
   What though your evil habits have grown with your growth, and
   strengthened with your strength? What though you have hitherto hated
   good, and loved evil, all the days of your life? These things are sad
   indeed; but there is hope, even for you. Christ can heal you: Christ
   can raise you from your low estate. Heaven is not shut against you.
   Christ is able to admit you, if you will humbly commit your soul into
   His hands.

   Are your sins forgiven? If not, I set before you this day a full and
   free salvation. I invite you to follow the steps of the penitent thief:
   come to Christ and live. I tell you that Jesus is very pitiful, and of
   tender mercy. I tell you He can do everything that your soul requires.
   Though your sins be as scarlet, He can make them white as snow; though
   they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. Why should you not be
   saved as well as another? Come unto Christ and live.

   Are you a true believer? If you are, you ought to glory in Christ.
   Glory not in your own faith, your own feelings, your own knowledge,
   your own prayers, your own amendment, your own diligence. Glory in
   nothing but Christ. Alas! The best of us know but little of that
   merciful and mighty Saviour. We do not exalt Him and glory in Him
   enough. Let us pray that we may see more of the fulness there is in
   Him.

   Do you ever try to do good to others? If you do, remember to tell them
   about Christ. Tell the young, tell the poor, tell the aged, tell the
   ignorant, tell the sick, tell the dying--tell them all about Christ.
   Tell them of His power, and tell them of His love; tell them of His
   doings, and tell them of His feelings; tell them what He has done for
   the chief of sinners; tell them what He is willing to do to the last
   day of time: tell it them over and over again. Never be tired of
   speaking of Christ. Say to them broadly and fully, freely and
   unconditionally, unreservedly and undoubtingly, "Come unto Christ, as
   the penitent thief did: come unto Christ, and you shall be saved."

   II. The second lesson we are meant to learn from this passage is
   this.--If some are saved in the very hour of death, others are not.

   This is a truth that never ought to be passed over, and I dare not
   leave it unnoticed. It is a truth that stands out plainly in the sad
   end of the other malefactor, and is only too often forgotten. Men
   forget that there were "two thieves."

   What became of the other thief who was crucified? Why did he not turn
   from his sin, and call upon the Lord? Why did he remain hardened and
   impenitent? Why was he not saved? It is useless to try to answer such
   questions. Let us be content to take the fact as we find it, and see
   what it is meant to teach us..

   We have no right whatever to say this thief was a worse man than his
   companion: there is nothing to prove it. Both plainly were wicked men;
   both were receiving the due reward of their deeds; both hung by the
   side of our Lord Jesus Christ; both heard Him pray for His murderers,
   both saw Him suffer patiently. But while one repented, the other
   remained hardened; while one began to pray, the other went on railing;
   while one was converted in his last hours, the other died a bad man, as
   he had lived; while one was taken to paradise, the other went to his
   own place--the place of the devil and his angels.

   Now these things are written for our warning. There is warning, as well
   as comfort in these verses, and that is a very solemn warning too.

   They tell me loudly, that though some may repent and be converted on
   their deathbeds, it does not at all follow that all will. A deathbed is
   not always a saving time.

   They tell me loudly, that two men may have the same opportunities of
   getting good for their souls, may be placed in the same position, see
   the same things, and hear the same things--and yet only one of the two
   shall take advantage of them, repent, believe and be saved.

   They tell me, above all, that repentance and faith are the gifts of God
   and are not in a man's own power; and that if anyone flatters himself
   he can repent at his own time, choose his own season, seek the Lord
   when he pleases, and, like the penitent thief, be saved at the very
   last--he may find at length he is greatly deceived.

   And it is good and profitable to bear this in mind. There is an immense
   amount of delusion in the world on this very subject. I see many
   allowing life to slip away, quite unprepared to die. I see many
   allowing that they ought to repent, but always putting off their own
   repentance. And I believe one grand reason is, that most men suppose
   they can turn to God just when they like! They wrest the parable of the
   labourer in the vineyard, which speaks of the eleventh hour, and use it
   as it never was meant to be used. They dwell on the pleasant part of
   the verses I am now considering, and forget the rest. They talk of the
   thief that went to paradise, and was saved, and they forget the one who
   died as he had lived--and was lost. [43]

   I entreat every man of common sense who reads this paper, to take heed
   that he does not fall into this mistake.

   Look at the history of men in the Bible, and see how often these
   notions I have been speaking of are contradicted. Mark well how many
   proofs there are that two men may have the same light offered them, and
   only one use it; and that no one has a right to take liberties with
   God's mercy, and presume he will be able to repent just when he likes.

   Look at Saul and David. They lived about the same time; they rose from
   the same rank in life; they were called to the same position in the
   world; they enjoyed the ministry of the same prophet, Samuel; they
   reigned the same number of years!--Yet one was saved, and the other
   lost.

   Look at Sergius Paulus and Gallio. They were both Roman governors; they
   were both wise and prudent men in their generation; they both heard the
   Apostle Paul preach! But one believed and was baptised--the other
   "cared for none of those things." (Acts xviii. 17.)

   Look at the world around you. See what is going on continually under
   your eyes. Two sisters will often attend the same ministry, listen to
   the same truths, hear the same sermons; and yet only one shall be
   converted unto God, while the other remains totally unmoved. Two
   friends often read the same religious book: one is so moved by it, that
   he gives up all for Christ; the other sees nothing at all in it, and
   continues the same as before. Hundreds have read Doddridge's Rise and
   Progress without profit: with Wilberforce it was one of the beginnings
   of spiritual life. Thousands have read Wilberforce's Practical View of
   Christianity and laid it down again unaltered: from the time Legh
   Richmond read it he became another man. No man has any warrant for
   saying, "Salvation is in my own power."

   I do not pretend to explain these things. I only put them before you as
   great facts; and I ask you to consider them well.

   You must not misunderstand me. I do not want to discourage you. I say
   these things in all affection, to give you warning of danger. I do not
   say them to drive you back from heaven.--I say them rather to draw you
   on, and bring you to Christ, while He can be found.

   I want you to beware of presumption. Do not abuse God's mercy and
   compassion. Do not continue in sin, I beseech you, and think you can
   repent, and believe, and be saved, just when you like, when you please,
   when you will, and when you choose. I would always set before you an
   open door. I would always say, "While there is life there is hope." But
   if you would be wise, put nothing off that concerns your soul.

   I want you to beware of letting slip good thoughts and godly
   convictions, if you have them. Cherish them and nourish them, lest you
   lose them for ever. Make the most of them, lest they take to themselves
   wings and flee away. Have you an inclination to begin praying? Put it
   in practice at once. Have you an idea of beginning really to serve
   Christ? Set about it at once. Are you enjoying any spiritual light? See
   that you live up to your light. Trifle not with opportunities, lest the
   day come when you will want to use them, and not be able. Linger not,
   lest you become wise too late.

   You may say, perhaps, "It is never too late to repent." I answer--"That
   is right enough: but late repentance is seldom true. And I say further,
   you cannot be certain if you put off repenting, you will repent at
   all."

   You may say, "Why should I be afraid?--the penitent thief was saved." I
   answer--"That is true: but look again at the passage which tells you
   that the other thief was lost."

   III. The third lesson we are meant to learn from these verses Is this:
   The Spirit always leads saved souls in one way.

   This is a point that deserves particular attention, and is often
   overlooked. Men look at the broad fact that the penitent thief was
   saved when he was dying, and they look no further.

   They do not consider the evidences this thief left behind him. They do
   not observe the abundant proof he gave of the work of the Spirit in his
   heart. And these proofs I wish to trace out. I wish to show you that
   the Spirit always works in one way, and that--whether He converts a man
   in an hour, as He did the penitent thief, or whether by slow degrees,
   as He does others--the steps by which He leads souls to heaven are
   always the same.

   Let me try to make this clear to everyone who reads this paper, I want
   to put you on your guard. I want you to shake off the common notion
   that there is some easy, royal road to heaven from a dying bed. I want
   you thoroughly to understand, that every saved soul goes through the
   same experience, and that the leading principles of the penitent
   thief's religion were just the same as those of the oldest saint that
   ever lived.

   (a) See then, for one thing, how strong was the faith of this man.

   He called Jesus "Lord." He declared his belief that He would have a
   "kingdom." He believed that He was able to give him eternal life and
   glory, and in this belief prayed to Him. He maintained His innocence of
   all the charges brought against Him. "This Man." said he, he hath done
   nothing amiss." Others perhaps may have thought the Lord innocent--none
   said so openly but this poor dying man.

   And when did all this happen? It happened when the whole nation had
   denied Christ--shouting, "Crucify Him, crucify Him: we have no king but
   Caesar,"--when the chief priests and Pharisees had condemned and found
   Him "guilty of death,"--when even His own disciples had forsaken Him
   and fled--when He was hanging, faint, bleeding, and dying on the cross,
   numbered with transgressors, and accounted accursed. This was the hour
   when the thief believed in Christ, and prayed to Him I Surely such
   faith was never seen since the world began. [44]

   The disciples had seen mighty signs and miracles. They had seen the
   dead raised with a word--and lepers healed with a touch --the blind
   receiving sight--the dumb made to speak--the lame made to walk. They
   had seen thousands fed with a few loaves and fishes. They had seen
   their Master walking on the water as on dry land. They had all of them
   heard Him speak as no man ever spake, and hold out promises of good
   things yet to come. They had some of them had a foretaste of His glory
   in the mount of transfiguration. Doubtless their faith was "the gift of
   God," but still they had much to help it.

   The dying thief saw none of the things I have mentioned. He only saw
   our Lord in agony, and in weakness, in suffering, and in pain. He saw
   Him undergoing a dishonourable punishment; deserted, mocked, despised,
   blasphemed. He saw Him rejected by all the great, and wise, and noble
   of His own people--His strength dried up like a potsherd, His life
   drawing nigh to the grave. (Ps. xxii. 15; lxxxviii. 3.) He saw no
   sceptre, no royal crown, no outward dominion, no glory, no majesty, no
   power, no signs of might. And yet the dying thief believed, and looked
   forward to Christ's kingdom.

   Would you know if you have the Spirit? Then mark the question I put to
   you this day.--Where is your faith in Christ?

   (b) See, for another thing, what a right sense of sin the thief had. He
   says to his companion, "We receive the due reward of our deeds." He
   acknowledges his own ungodliness, and the justice of his punishment. He
   makes no attempt to justify himself, or excuse his wickedness. He
   speaks like a man humbled and self-abased by the remembrance of past
   iniquities. This is what all God's children feel. They are ready to
   allow they are poor, hell-deserving sinners. They can say with their
   hearts as well as with their lips, "We have left undone the things that
   we ought to have done, and we have done those things that we ought not
   to have done, and there is no health in us."

   Would you know if you have the Spirit? Then mark my question.--Do you
   feel your sins?

   (c) See, for another thing, what brotherly love the thief showed to his
   companion. He tried to stop his railing and blaspheming, and bring him
   to a better mind. "Dost not thou fear God," he says, "seeing thou art
   in the same condemnation?" There is no surer mark of grace than this I
   Grace shakes a man out of his selfishness, and makes him feel for the
   souls of others. When the Samaritan woman was converted, she left her
   water-pot, and ran to the city, saying, "Come, see a man that told me
   all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?" (John iv. 28, 29.)
   When Saul was converted, immediately he went to the synagogue at
   Damascus and testified to his brethren of Israel that "Christ was the
   Son of God." (Acts ix. 20.) Would you know if you have the Spirit? Then
   where is your charity and love to souls?

   In one word, you see in the penitent thief a finished work of the Holy
   Ghost. Every part of the believer's character may be traced in him.
   Short as his life was after conversion, he found time to leave abundant
   evidence that he was a child of God. His faith, his prayer, his
   humility, his brotherly love, are unmistakable witnesses of the reality
   of his repentance. He was not a penitent in name only, but in deed and
   m truth.

   Let no man therefore think, because the penitent thief was saved, that
   men can be saved without leaving any evidence of the Spirit's work. Let
   such an one consider well what evidences this man left behind, and take
   care.

   It is mournful to hear what people sometimes say about what they call
   deathbed evidences. It is perfectly fearful to observe how little
   satisfies some persons, and how easily they can persuade themselves
   that their friends have gone to heaven. They will tell you when their
   relative is dead and gone, that "he made such a beautiful prayer one
   day--or that he talked so well--or that he was so sorry for his old
   ways and intended to live so differently if he got better--or that he
   craved nothing in this world--or that he liked people to read to him,
   and pray with him." And because they have this to go upon, they seem to
   have a comfortable hope that he is saved! Christ may never have been
   named--the way of salvation may never have been in the least mentioned.
   But it matters not; there was a little talk of religion, and so they
   are content!

   Now I have no desire to hurt the feelings of anyone who reads this
   paper, but I must and will speak plainly upon this subject.

   Once for all, let me say, that as a general rule, nothing is so
   unsatisfactory as deathbed evidences. The things that men say, and the
   feelings they express when sick and frightened, are little to be
   depended on. Often, too often, they are the result of fear, and do not
   spring from the ground of the heart. Often, too often, they are things
   said by rote; caught from the lips of ministers and anxious friends,
   but evidently not felt. And nothing can prove all this more clearly
   than the well-known fact, that the great majority of persons who make
   promises of amendment on a sick bed, and then for the first time talk
   about religion, if they recover, go back to sin and the world.

   When a man has lived a life of thoughtlessness and folly, I want
   something more than a few fair words and good wishes to satisfy me
   about his soul, when he comes to his deathbed. It is not enough for me
   that he will let me read the Bible to him, and pray by his
   bedside--that he says, "he has not thought so much as he ought of
   religion, and he thinks he should be a different man if he got better."
   All this does not content me: it does not make me feel happy about his
   state. It is very well as far as it goes, but it is not conversion. It
   is very well in its way, but it is not faith in Christ. Until I see
   conversion, and faith in Christ, I cannot and dare not feel satisfied.
   Others may feel satisfied if they please, and after their friend's
   death say, they hope he is gone to heaven. For my part, I would rather
   hold my tongue and say nothing. I would be content with the least
   measure of repentance and faith in a dying man, even though it be no
   bigger than a grain of mustard seed. But to be content with anything
   less than repentance and faith, seems to me next door to infidelity.

   What kind of evidence do you mean to leave behind as to the state of
   your soul? Take example by the penitent thief, and you will do well.

   When we have carried you to your narrow bed, let us not have to hunt up
   stray words, and scraps of religion, in order to make out that you were
   a true believer. Let us not have to say in a hesitating way one to
   another, "I trust he is happy; he talked so nicely one day; and he
   seemed so pleased with a chapter in the Bible on another occasion; and
   he liked such a person, who is a good man." Let us be able to speak
   decidedly as to your condition. Let us have some solid proof of your
   repentance, your faith, and your holiness, so that none shall be able
   for a moment to question your state. Depend on it, without this, those
   you leave behind can feel no solid comfort about your soul. We may use
   the form of religion at your burial, and express charitable hopes. We
   may meet you at the churchyard gate and say, "Blessed are the dead that
   die in the Lord." But this will not alter your condition! If you die
   without conversion to God--without repentance, and without faith--your
   funeral will only be the funeral of a lost soul; you had better never
   have been born.

   IV. We are meant, in the next place, to learn from these verses, that
   believers in Christ when they die are with the Lord.

   This you may gather from our Lord's words to the penitent thief: "This
   day shalt thou be with Me in paradise." And you have an expression very
   like it in the Epistle to the Philippians, where Paul says he has a
   desire to "depart and be with Christ." (Phil. i. 23.)

   I shall say but little on this subject. I would simply lay it before
   you, for your own private meditations. To my own mind it is very full
   of comfort and peace.

   Believers after death are "with Christ." That answers many a difficult
   question, which otherwise might puzzle man's busy, restless mind. The
   abode of dead saints, their joys, their feelings, their happiness, all
   seem met by this simple expression--they are "with Christ."

   I cannot enter into full explanations about the separate state of
   departed believers. It is a high and deep subject, such as man's mind
   can neither grasp nor fathom. I know their happiness falls short of
   what it will be when their bodies are raised again, in the resurrection
   at the last day, and Jesus returns to earth. Yet I know also they enjoy
   a blessed rest, a rest from labour--a rest from sorrow--a rest from
   pain--and a rest from sin. But it does not follow because I cannot
   explain these things, that I am not persuaded they are far happier than
   they ever were on earth. I see their happiness in this very passage,
   "They are with Christ," and when I see that, I see enough.

   If the sheep are with the Shepherd--if the members are with the
   Head--if the children of Christ's family are with Him who loved them
   and carried them all the days of their pilgrimage on earth, all must be
   well, all must be right.

   I cannot describe what kind of place paradise is, because I cannot
   understand the condition of a soul separate from the body. But I ask no
   brighter view of paradise than this--that Christ is there. [45] All
   other things in the picture which imagination draws of the state
   between death and resurrection, are nothing in comparison of this. How
   He is there, and in what way He is there, I know not. Let me only see
   Christ in paradise when my eyes close in death, and that sufficeth me.
   Well does the Psalmist say, "In Thy presence is fulness of joy." (Psa.
   xvi. 11.) It was a true saying of a dying girl, when her mother tried
   to comfort her by describing what paradise would be. "There," she said
   to the child, "there you will have no pains, and no sickness; there you
   will see your brothers and sisters who have gone before you, and will
   be always happy." "Ah, mother!" was the reply, "but there is one thing
   better than all, and that is, Christ will be there."

   It may be you do not think much about your soul. It may be you know
   little of Christ as your Saviour, and have never tasted by experience
   that He is precious. And yet perhaps you hope to go to paradise when
   you die. Surely this passage is one that should make you think.
   Paradise is a place where Christ is. Then can it be a place that you
   would enjoy??

   It may be you are a believer, and yet tremble at the thought of the
   grave. It seems cold and dreary. You feel as if all before you was dark
   and gloomy, and comfortless. Fear not, but be encouraged by this text.
   You are going to paradise, and Christ will be there.

   V. The last thing we are meant to learn from these verses is this: The
   eternal portion of every man's soul is close to him.

   "To-day," says our Lord to the penitent thief, "to-day shalt thou be
   with Me in paradise." He names no distant period--He does not talk of
   His entering into a state of happiness as a thing "far away," He speaks
   of to-day--"this very day in which thou art hanging on the cross."

   How near that seems! How awfully near that word brings our everlasting
   dwelling-place! Happiness or misery--sorrow or joy--the presence of
   Christ or the company of devils--all are close to us. "There is but a
   step," says David, "between me and death." (1 Sam. xx. 3.) There is but
   a step, we may say, between ourselves and either paradise or hell.

   We none of us realize this as we ought to do. It is high time to shake
   off the dreamy state of mind in which we live on this matter. We are
   apt to talk and think, even about believers, as if death was a long
   journey--as if the dying saint had embarked on a long voyage. It is all
   wrong, very wrong! Their harbour and their home is close by, and they
   have entered it.

   Some of us know by bitter experience what a long and weary time it is
   between the death of those we love, and the hour when we bury them out
   of our sight. Such weeks are the slowest, saddest, heaviest weeks in
   all our lives. But, blessed be God, the souls of departed saints are
   free from the very moment their last breath is drawn. While we are
   weeping, and the coffin is preparing, and the mourning being provided,
   and the last painful arrangements being made, the spirits of our
   beloved ones are enjoying the presence of Christ. They are freed for
   ever from the burden of the flesh. They are "where the wicked cease
   from troubling, and the weary be at rest." (Job iii. 17.)

   The very moment that believers die they are in paradise. Their battle
   is fought: their strife is over. They have passed through that gloomy
   valley we must one day tread; they have gone over that dark river we
   must one day cross. They have drunk that last bitter cup which sin has
   mingled for man: they have reached that place where sorrow and sighing
   are no more. Surely we should not wish them back again! We should not
   weep for them, but for ourselves.

   We are warring still, but they are at peace. We are labouring, but they
   are at rest. We are watching, but they are sleeping. We are wearing our
   spiritual armour, but they have for ever put it off. We are still at
   sea, but they are safe in harbour. We have tears, but they have joy. We
   are strangers and pilgrims, but as for them they are at home. Surely,
   better are the dead in Christ than the living! Surely the very hour the
   poor saint dies, he is at once higher and happier than the highest upon
   earth. [46]

   I fear there is a vast amount of delusion on this point. I fear that
   many, who are not Roman Catholics, and profess not to believe in
   purgatory, have, notwithstanding, some strange ideas in their minds
   about the immediate consequences of death.

   I fear that many have a sort of vague notion that there is some
   interval or space of time between death and their eternal state. They
   fancy they shall go through a kind of purifying change, and that though
   they die unfit for heaven, they shall yet be found meet for it after
   all!

   But this is an entire mistake. There is no change after death: there is
   no conversion in the grave: there is no new heart given after the last
   breath is drawn. The very day we go, we launch for ever: the day we go
   from this world, we begin an eternal condition. From that day there is
   no spiritual alteration--no spiritual change. As we die, so we shall
   receive our portion after death: as the tree falls, so it must lie.

   If you are an unconverted man, this ought to make you think, Do you
   know you are close to hell? This very day you might die; and if you
   died out of Christ you would open your eyes at once in in hell, and in
   torment.

   If you are a true Christian, you are far nearer heaven than you think.
   This very day if the Lord should take you, you would find yourself in
   paradise. The good land of promise is near to you. The eyes that you
   closed in weakness and pain would open at once on a glorious rest, such
   as my tongue cannot describe.

   And now let me say a few words in conclusion, and I have done.

   (1) This paper may fall into the hands of some humble-hearted and
   contrite sinner.--Are you that man? Then here is encouragement for you.
   See what the penitent thief did, and do likewise. See how he prayed;
   see how he called on the Lord Jesus Christ; see what an answer of peace
   he obtained. Brother or sister, why should not you do the same? Why
   should not you also be saved?

   (2) This paper may fall into the hands of some proud and presumptuous
   man of the world.--Are you that man? Then take warning. See how the
   impenitent thief died as he had lived and beware lest you come to a
   like end. Oh, erring brother or sister, be not too confident, lest you
   die in your sins! Seek the Lord while He may be found. Turn you, turn:
   why will you die?

   (3) This paper may fall into the hands of some professing believer in
   Christ. Are you such an one? Then take the penitent thief's religion as
   a measure by which to prove your own. See that you know something of
   true repentance and saving faith, of real humility and fervent charity.
   Brother or sister, do not be satisfied with the world's standard of
   Christianity. Be of one mind with the penitent thief, and you will be
   wise.

   (4) This paper may fall into the hands of someone who is mourning over
   departed believers.--Are you such an one? Then take comfort from this
   Scripture. See how your beloved ones are in the best of hands. They
   cannot be better off. They never were so well in their lives as they
   are now. They are with Jesus, whom their souls loved on earth. Oh,
   cease from your selfish mourning I Rejoice rather that they are freed
   from trouble, and have entered into rest.

   (5) And this paper may fall into the hands of some aged servant of
   Christ. Are you such an one? Then see from these verses how near you
   are to home. Your salvation is nearer than when you first believed. A
   few more days of labour and sorrow, and the King of kings shall send
   for you; and in a moment your warfare shall be at end, and all shall be
   peace.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [42] "O Saviour, what a precedent is this of Thy free and powerful
   grace! Where Thou wilt give, what unworthiness can bar us from Thy
   mercy? When Thou wilt give, what time can prejudice our vocation? Who
   can despair of Thy goodness, when he, that in the morning was posting
   to hell, is in the evening with Thee in Paradise?"--Bishop Hall.

   [43] "He that puts off his repentance and seeking for pardon to the
   very last, in reliance upon this example, does but tempt God, and turn
   that to his own poison, which God intended for better ends. "The
   mercies of God are never recorded in Scripture for man's presumption,
   and the failings of men never for imitation."--Lightfoot. Sermon. 1684.
   "Most ungrateful and foolish is the conduct of those who take
   encouragement from the penitent thief to put off repentance to a dying
   moment; most ungrateful in perverting the grace of their Redeemer into
   an occasion of renewing their provocations against Him; and most
   foolish to imagine that what our Lord did in so singular circumstances,
   is to be drawn into an ordinary precedent."--Doddridge.

   [44] "I know not that since the creation of the world there ever was a
   more remarkable and striking example of faith."--Calvin/s Commentary on
   the Gospels. "A great faith that can see the sun under so thick a
   cloud; that can discover a Christ, a Saviour, under such a poor,
   scorned, despised, crucified Jesus, and call Him Lord. "A great faith
   that could see Christ's kingdom through His cross, and grave, and
   death, and when there was so little sign of a kingdom, and pray to be
   remembered In that kingdom."--Lightfoot. Sermon. 1684. "The penitent
   thief was the first confessor of Christ's heavenly kingdom--the first
   martyr who bore testimony to the holiness of His sufferings--and the
   first apologist for His oppressed innocence."--Quesnel on the Gospel.
   "Probably there are few saints in glory who ever honoured Christ more
   illustriously than this dying sinner."--Doddridge. "Is this the voice
   of a thief or a disciple? Give me leave, O Saviour, to borrow Thine own
   words, Verily I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel.' He
   saw Thee hanging miserably by him, and yet styles Thee Lord. He saw
   Thee dying, and yet talks of Thy kingdom. He felt himself dying, yet
   talks of a future remembrance, O faith, stronger than death, which can
   look beyond the cross at a crown; beyond dissolution at a remembrance
   of life and glory! Which of Thine eleven were heard to speak so
   gracious a word to Thee in these Thy last pangs?"--Bishop Hall.

   [45] "We ought not to enter into curious and subtle arguments about the
   place of paradise. Let us rest satisfied with knowing that those who
   are engrafted by faith into the body of Christ are partakers of life,
   and there enjoy after death a blessed and joyful rest, until the
   perfect glory of the heavenly life is fully manifested by the coming of
   Christ."--Calvin's Commentary on the Gospels.

   [46] "We give Thee hearty thanks, for that it hath pleased Thee to
   deliver this our brother out of the miseries of this sinful
   world."--Church of England Burial Service. "I have some of the best
   news to impart. One beloved by you has accomplished her warfare; has
   received an answer to her prayers, and everlasting joy rests upon her
   head. My dear wife, the source of my best earthly comfort for twenty
   years, departed on Tuesday."--Venn's Letter to Stillingfleet,
   announcing the death of his wife.
     __________________________________________________________________

XII.
THE RULER OF THE WAVES

   "And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the
   ship, so that it was now full.

   "And He was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a pillow: and
   they awake Him, and say unto Him, Master, carest Thou not that we
   perish?

   "And He arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be
   still. And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.

   "And He said unto them, Why are ye so fearful. How is it that ye have
   no faith?"--Mark iv. 37-40.

   IT would be well if professing Christians in modern days studied the
   four Gospels more than they do. No doubt all Scripture is profitable.
   It is not wise to exalt one part of the Bible at the expense of
   another. But I think it should be good for some who are very familiar
   with the Epistles, if they knew a little more about Matthew, Mark,
   Luke, and John.

   Now why do I say this? I say it because I want professing Christians to
   know more about Christ. It is well to be acquainted with all the
   doctrines and principles of Christianity. It is better to be acquainted
   with Christ Himself. It is well to be familiar with faith, and grace,
   and justification, and sanctification. They are all matters "pertaining
   to the King." But it is far better to be familiar with Jesus Himself,
   to see the King's own face, and to behold His beauty. This is one
   secret of eminent holiness. He that would be conformed to Christ's
   image, and become a Christ-like man, must be constantly studying Christ
   Himself.

   Now the Gospels were written to make us acquainted with Christ. The
   Holy Ghost has told us the story of His life and death--His sayings and
   His doings, four times over. Four different, inspired hands have drawn
   the picture of the Saviour. His ways, His manners, His feelings, His
   wisdom, His grace, His patience, His love, His power, are graciously
   unfolded to us by four different witnesses. Ought not the sheep to be
   familiar with the Shepherd? Ought not the patient to be familiar with
   the Physician? Ought not the bride to be familiar with the Bridegroom?
   Ought not the sinner to be familiar with the Saviour? Beyond doubt it
   ought to be so. The Gospels were written to make men familiar with
   Christ, and therefore I wish men to study the Gospels.

   On whom must we build our souls if we would be accepted with God? We
   must build on the rock, Christ. From whom must we draw that grace of
   the Spirit which we daily need in order to be fruitful? We must draw
   from the vine, Christ. To whom must we look for sympathy when earthly
   friends fail us or die? We must look to our elder brother, Christ. By
   whom must our prayers be presented, if they are to be heard on high?
   They must be presented by our advocate, Christ. With whom do we hope to
   spend the thousand years of glory, and the after eternity? With the
   King of kings, Christ. Surely we cannot know this Christ too well!
   Surely there is not a word, nor a deed, nor a day, nor a step, nor a
   thought in the record of His life, which ought not to be precious to
   us. We should labour to be familiar with every line that is written
   about Jesus.

   Come now, and let us study a page in our Master's history. Let us
   consider what we may learn from the verses of Scripture which stand at
   the head of this paper. You there see Jesus crossing the lake of
   Galilee, in a boat with His disciples. You see a sudden storm arise
   while He is asleep. The waves beat into the boat and fill it. Death
   seems to be close at hand. The frightened disciples awake their Master
   and cry for help. He arises and rebukes the wind and the waves, and at
   once there is a calm. He mildly reproves the faithless fears of His
   companions, and all is over. Such is the picture. It is one full of
   deep instruction. Come now, and let us examine what we are meant to
   learn.

   1. Let us learn, first of all, that following Christ will not prevent
   our having earthly sorrows and troubles.

   Here are the chosen disciples of the Lord Jesus in great anxiety. The
   faithful little flock which believed when priests, and scribes, and
   Pharisees were all alike unbelieving, is allowed by the Shepherd to be
   much disquieted. The fear of death breaks in upon them like an armed
   man. The deep water seems likely to go over their souls. Peter, James,
   and John, the pillars of the Church about to be planted in the world,
   are much distressed.

   Perhaps they had not reckoned on all this. Perhaps they had expected
   that Christ's service would at any rate lift them above the reach of
   earthly trials. Perhaps they thought that He who could raise the dead,
   and heal the sick, and feed multitudes with a few loaves, and cast out
   devils with a word--He would never allow His servants to be sufferers
   upon earth. Perhaps they had supposed He would always grant them smooth
   journeys, fine weather, an easy course, and freedom from trouble and
   care.

   If the disciples thought so, they were much mistaken. The Lord Jesus
   taught them that a man may be one of His chosen servants, and yet have
   to go through many an anxiety, and endure many a pain.

   It is good to understand this clearly. It is good to understand that
   Christ's service never did secure a man from all the ills that flesh is
   heir to, and never will. If you are a believer, you must reackon on
   having your share of sickness and pain, of sorrow and tears, of losses
   and crosses, of deaths and bereavements, of partings and separations,
   of vexations and disappointments, so long as you are in the body.
   Christ never undertakes that you shall get to heaven without these. He
   has undertaken that all who come to Him shall have all things
   pertaining to life and godliness; but He has never undertaken that He
   will make them prosperous, or rich, or healthy, and that death and
   sorrow shall never come to their family.

   I have the privilege of being one of Christ's ambassadors. In His name
   I can offer eternal fife to any man, woman, or child who is willing to
   have it. In His name I do offer pardon, peace, grace, glory, to any son
   or daughter of Adam who reads this paper. But I dare not offer that
   person worldly prosperity as a part and parcel of the Gospel. I dare
   not offer him long life, an increased income, and freedom from pain. I
   dare not promise the man who takes up the cross and follows Christ,
   that in the following he shall never meet with a storm.

   I know well that many do not like these terms. They would prefer having
   Christ and good health--Christ and plenty of money--Christ and no
   deaths in their family--Christ and no wearing cares--Christ and a
   perpetual morning without clouds. But they do not like Christ and the
   cross--Christ and tribulation--Christ and the conflict--Christ and the
   howling wind--Christ and the storm.

   Is this the secret thought of anyone who is reading this paper? Believe
   me, if it is, you are very wrong. Listen to me, and I will try to show
   you you have yet much to learn.

   How should you know who are true Christians, if following Christ was
   the way to be free from trouble? How should we discern the wheat from
   the chaff, if it were not for the winnowing of trial? How should we
   know whether men served Christ for His own sake or from selfish
   motives, if His service brought health and wealth with it as a matter
   of course? The winds of winter soon show us which of the trees are
   evergreen and which are not. The storms of affliction and care are
   useful in the same way. They discover whose faith is real, and whose is
   nothing but profession and form.

   How would the great work of sanctification go on in a man if he had no
   trial? Trouble is often the only fire which will burn away the dross
   that clings to our hearts. Trouble is the pruning-knife which the great
   Husbandman employs in order to make us fruitful in good works. The
   harvest of the Lord's field is seldom ripened by sunshine only. It must
   go through its days of wind, and rain, and storm.

   If you desire to serve Christ and be saved, I entreat you to take the
   Lord on His own terms. Make up your mind to meet with your share of
   crosses and sorrows, and then you will not be surprised. For want of
   understanding this, many seem to run well for a season, and then turn
   back in disgust, and are cast away.

   If you profess to be a child of God, leave to the Lord Jesus to
   sanctify you in His own way. Rest satisfied that He never makes any
   mistakes. Be sure that He does all things well. The winds may howl
   around you, and the waters swell. But fear not, "He is leading you by
   the right way, that He may bring you to a city of habitation." (Psalm
   cvii. 7.)

   II. Let us learn, in the second place, that the Lord Jesus Christ is
   truly and really Man.

   There are words used in this little history which, like many other
   passages in the Gospel, bring out this truth in a very striking way. We
   are told that when the waves began to break on the ship, Jesus was in
   the hinder part, "asleep on a pillow." He was weary; and who can wonder
   at it, after reading the account given in the fourth chapter of Mark?
   After labouring all day to do good to souls--after preaching in the
   open air to vast multitudes, Jesus was fatigued. Surely if the sleep of
   the labouring man is sweet, much more sweet must have been the sleep of
   our blessed Lord!

   Let us settle in our minds this great truth, that Jesus Christ was
   verily and indeed Man. He was equal to the Father in all things, and
   the eternal God. But He was also Man, and took part of flesh and blood,
   and was made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted. He had a
   body like our own. Like us, He was born of a woman. Like us, He grew
   and increased in stature. Like us, He was often hungry and thirsty, and
   faint and weary. Like us, He ate and drank, rested and slept. Like us,
   He sorrowed, and wept, and felt. It is all very wonderful, but so it
   is. He that made the heavens went to and fro as a poor, weary Man on
   earth! He that ruled over principalities and powers in heavenly places,
   took on Him a frail body like our own. He that might have dwelt for
   ever in the glory which He had with the Father, amidst the praises of
   legions of angels, came down to earth and dwelt as a Man among sinful
   men. Surely this fact alone is an amazing miracle of condescension,
   grace, pity, and love.

   I find a deep mine of comfort in this thought, that Jesus is perfect
   Man no less than perfect God. He in whom I am told by Scripture to
   trust is not only a great High Priest, but a feeling High Priest. He is
   not only a powerful Saviour, but a sympathising Saviour, He is not only
   the Son of God, mighty to save, but the Son of man, able to feel.

   Who does not know that sympathy is one of the sweetest things left to
   us in this sinful world? It is one of the bright seasons in our dark
   journey here below, when we can find a person who enters into our
   troubles, and goes along with us in our anxieties--who can weep when we
   weep, and rejoice when we rejoice.

   Sympathy is far better than money, and far rarer too. Thousands can
   give who know not what it is to feel. Sympathy has the greatest power
   to draw us and to open our hearts. Proper and correct counsel often
   falls dead and useless on a heavy heart. Cold advice often makes us
   shut up, shrink, and withdraw into ourselves, when tendered in the day
   of trouble. But genuine sympathy in such a day will call out all our
   better feelings, if we have any, and obtain an influence over us when
   nothing else can. Give me the friend who, though poor in gold and
   silver, has always ready a sympathizing heart.

   Our God knows all this well. He knows the very secrets of man's heart.
   He knows the ways by which that heart is most easily approached, and
   the springs by which that heart is most readily moved. He has wisely
   provided that the Saviour of the Gospel should be feeling as well as
   mighty. He has given us one who has not only a strong hand to pluck us
   as brands from the burning, but a sympathizing heart on which the
   labouring and heavy-laden may find rest.

   I see a marvellous proof of love and wisdom in the union of two natures
   in Christ's person. It was marvellous love in our Saviour to condescend
   to go through weakness and humiliation for our sakes, ungodly rebels as
   we are. It was marvellous wisdom to fit Himself in this way to be the
   very Friend of friends, who could not only save man, but meet him on
   his own ground. I want one able to perform all things needful to redeem
   my soul. This Jesus can do, for He is the eternal Son of God. I want
   one able to understand my weakness and infirmities, and to deal gently
   with my soul, while tied to a body of death. This again Jesus can do,
   for He was the Son of man, and had flesh and blood like my own. Had my
   Saviour been God only, I might perhaps have trusted Him, but I never
   could have come near to Him without fear. Had my Saviour been Man only,
   I might have loved Him, but I never could have felt sure that He was
   able to take away my sins. But, blessed be God, my Saviour is God as
   well as Man, and Man as well as God--God, and so able to deliver
   me--Man, and so able to feel with me. Almighty power and deepest
   sympathy are met together in one glorious person, Jesus Christ, my
   Lord. Surely a believer in Christ has a strong consolation. He may well
   trust, and not be afraid.

   If any reader of this paper knows what it is to go to the throne of
   grace for mercy and pardon, let him never forget that the Mediator by
   whom he draws near to God is the Man Christ Jesus.

   Your soul's business is in the hand of a High Priest who can be touched
   with the feeling of your infirmities. You have not to do with a being
   of so high and glorious a nature that your mind can in no wise
   comprehend Him. You have to do with Jesus, who had a body like your own
   and was a Man upon earth like yourself. He well knows that world
   through which you are struggling, for He dwelt in the midst of it
   thirty-three years. He well knows "the contradictions of sinners,"
   which so often discourages you, for He endured it Himself. (Heb. xii.
   3.) He well knows the art and cunning of your spiritual enemy, the
   devil, for He wrestled with him in the wilderness. Surely, with such an
   advocate you may well feel bold.

   If you know what it is to apply to the Lord Jesus for spiritual comfort
   in earthly troubles, you should well remember the days of His flesh,
   and His human nature.

   You are applying to One who knows your feelings by experience, and has
   drunk deep of the bitter cup, for He was "a Man of sorrows, and
   acquainted with grief." (Isa. liii. 3.) Jesus knows the heart of a
   man--the bodily pains of a man--the difficulties of a man, for he was a
   Man Himself, and had flesh and blood upon earth. He sat wearied by the
   well at Sychar. He wept over the grave of Lazarus at Bethany. He sweat
   great drops of blood at Gethsemane. He groaned with anguish at Calvary.

   He is no stranger to your sensations. He is acquainted with everything
   that belongs to human nature, sin only excepted.

   (a) Are you poor and needy? So also was Jesus. The foxes had holes, and
   the birds of the air had nests, but the Son of man had not where to lay
   His head. He dwelt in a despised city. Men used to say, "Can any good
   thing come out of Nazareth?" (John i. 46.) He was esteemed a
   carpenter's son. He preached in a borrowed boat, rode into Jerusalem on
   a borrowed ass, and was buried in a borrowed tomb.

   (b) Are you alone in the world, and neglected by those who ought to
   love you? So also was Jesus. He came unto His own, and they received
   Him not. He came to be a Messiah to the lost sheep of the house of
   Israel, and they rejected Him. The princes of this world would not
   acknowledge Him. The few that followed Him were publicans and
   fishermen. And even these at the last forsook Him, and were scattered
   every man to his own place.

   (c) Are you misunderstood, misrepresented, slandered, and persecuted?
   So also was Jesus. He was called a glutton and a wine-bibber, a friend
   of publicans, a Samaritan, a madman, and a devil. His character was
   belied. False charges were laid against Him. An unjust sentence was
   passed upon Him, and, though innocent, He was condemned as a
   malefactor, and as such died on the cross.

   (d) Does Satan tempt you, and offer horrid suggestions to your mind? So
   also did he tempt Jesus. He bade Him to distrust God's fatherly
   providence. "Command these stones to be made bread." He proposed to Him
   to tempt God by exposing Himself to unnecessary danger. "Cast Thyself
   down" from the pinnacle of the temple. He suggested to Him to obtain
   the kingdoms of the world for His own, by one little act of submission
   to himself. "All these things will I give Thee, if Thou wilt fall down
   and worship me." (Matt. iv. 1-10.)

   (e) Do you ever feel great agony and conflict of mind? Do you feel in
   darkness as if God had left you? So did Jesus. Who can tell the extent
   of the sufferings of mind He went through in the garden? Who can
   measure the depth of His soul's pain when He cried, "My God! my God!
   why hast Thou forsaken me?" (Matt. xxvii. 46.)

   It is impossible to conceive a Saviour more suited to the wants of
   man's heart than our Lord Jesus Christ--suited not only by His power,
   but by His sympathy--suited not only by His divinity, but by His
   humanity. Labour, I beseech you, to get firmly impressed on your mind
   that Christ, the refuge of souls, is Man as well as God. Honour Him as
   King of kings, and Lord of lords. But while you do this, never forget
   that He had a body and was a Man. Grasp this truth and never let it go.
   The unhappy Socinian errs fearfully when he says that Christ was only
   Man, and not God. But let not the rebound from that error make you
   forget that while Christ was very God He was also very Man.

   Listen not for a moment to the wretched argument of the Roman Catholic
   when he tells you that the Virgin Mary and the saints are more
   sympathizing than Christ. Answer him that such an argument springs from
   ignorance of the Scriptures and of Christ's true nature. Answer him,
   that you have not so learned Christ as to regard Him only as an austere
   Judge and a being to be feared. Answer him, that the four Gospels have
   taught you to regard Him as the most loving and sympathizing of
   friends, as well as the mightiest and most powerful of Saviours. Answer
   him, that you want no comfort from saints and angels, from the Virgin
   Mary or from Gabriel, so long as you can repose your weary soul on THE
   MAN CHRIST JESUS.

   III. Let us learn, in the third place, that there may be much weakness
   and infirmity, even in a true Christian.

   You have a striking proof of this in the conduct of the disciples here
   recorded, when the waves broke over the ship. They awoke Jesus in
   haste. They said to Him, in fear and anxiety, "Master, carest Thou not
   that we perish? "

   There was impatience. They might have waited till their Lord thought
   fit to arise from His sleep.

   There was unbelief. They forgot that they were in the keeping of One
   who had all power in His hand. "We perish."

   There was distrust. They spoke as if they doubted their Lord's care and
   thoughtfulness for their safety and well-being. "Carest Thou not that
   we perish?"

   Poor faithless men! What business had they to be afraid? They had seen
   proof upon proof that all must be well so long as the Bridegroom was
   with them. They had witnessed repeated examples of His love and
   kindness towards them, sufficient to convince them that He would never
   let them come to real harm. But all was forgotten in the present
   danger. Sense of immediate peril often makes men have a bad memory.
   Fear is often unable to reason from past experience. They heard the
   winds. They saw the waves. They felt the cold waters beating over them.
   They fancied death was close at hand. They could wait no longer in
   suspense. "Carest Thou not," said they, "that we perish?"

   But, after all, let us understand this is only a picture of what is
   constantly going on among believers in every age. There are too many
   disciples, I suspect, at this very day, like those who are here
   described.

   Many of God's children get on very well so long as they have no trials.
   They follow Christ very tolerably in the time of fair weather. They
   fancy they are trusting Him entirely. They flatter themselves they have
   cast every care on Him. They obtain the reputation of being very good
   Christians.

   But suddenly some unlooked-for trial assails them. Their property makes
   itself wings and flies away. Their own health fails. Death comes up
   into their house. Tribulation or persecution ariseth, because of the
   word. And where now is their faith? Where is the strong confidence they
   thought they had? Where is their peace, their hope, their resignation?
   Alas, they are sought for and not found. They are weighed in the
   balances and found wanting. Fear, and doubt, and distress, and anxiety,
   break in upon them like a flood, and they seem at their wits' end. I
   know that this is a sad description. I only put it to the conscience of
   every real Christian, whether it is not correct and true.

   The plain truth is that there is no literal and absolute perfection
   among true Christians, so long as they are in the body. The best and
   brightest of God's saints is but a poor mixed being. Converted,
   renewed, and sanctified though he be, he is still compassed with
   infirmity. There is not a just man upon earth that always doeth good
   and sinneth not. In many things we offend all. A man may have true
   saving faith, and yet not have it always close at hand, and ready to be
   used. (Eccles. vii. 20; James iii. 2.)

   Abraham was the father of the faithful. By faith he forsook his country
   and his kindred, and went out according to the command of God, to a
   land he had never seen. By faith he was content to dwell in the land as
   a stranger, believing that God would give it to him for an inheritance.
   And yet this very Abraham was so far overcome by unbelief, that he
   allowed Sarah to be called his sister, and not his wife, through the
   fear of man. Here was great infirmity. Yet there have been few greater
   saints than Abraham.

   David was a man after God's own heart. He had faith to go out to battle
   with the giant Goliath when he was but a youth. He publicly declared
   his belief that the Lord who delivered him from the paw of the lion and
   bear, would deliver him from this Philistine. He had faith to believe
   God's promise that he should one day be King of Israel, though he was
   owned by few followers--though Saul pursued him like a partridge on the
   mountains and there often seemed but a step between him and death. And
   yet this very David at one time was so far overtaken by fear and
   unbelief that he said, "I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul." (1
   Sam. xxvii. 1.) He forgot the many wonderful deliverances he had
   experienced at God's hand. He only thought of his present danger, and
   took refuge among the ungodly Philistines. Surely here was great
   infirmity. Yet there have been few stronger believers than David.

   I know it is easy for a man to reply, "All this is very true, but k
   does not excuse the fears of the disciples. They had Jesus actually
   with them. They ought not to have been afraid. I should never have been
   so cowardly and faithless as they were!" I tell the man who argues in
   that way, that he knows little of his own heart. I tell him no one
   knows the length and breadth of his own infirmities if he has not been
   tempted. No one can say how much weakness might appear in himself if he
   was placed in circumstances to call it forth.

   Does any reader of this paper think that he believes in Christ? Do you
   feel such love and confidence in Him that you cannot understand being
   greatly moved by any event that could happen? It is all well. I am glad
   to hear it. But has this faith been tried? Has this confidence been put
   to the test? If not, take heed of condemning these disciples hastily.
   Be not high-minded, but fear. Think not because your heart is in a
   lively frame now, that such a frame will always last. Say not, because
   your feelings are warm and fervent to-day, "to-morrow shall be as
   to-day, and much more abundant." Say not, because your heart is lifted
   up just now with a strong sense of Christ's mercy, "I shall never
   forget Him as long as I live." Oh, learn to abate something of this
   flattering estimate of yourself. You do not know yourself thoroughly.
   There are more things in your inward man than you are at present aware
   of. The Lord may leave you as He did Hezekiah, to show you all that is
   in your heart. (2 Chron. xxxii. 31.) Blessed is he that is "clothed
   with humility."--"Happy is he that feareth always." "Let him that
   thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." (1 Pet. v. 5; Prov.
   xxviii. 14; 1 Cor. x. 12.)

   Why do I dwell on this? Do I want to apologize for the corruptions of
   professing Christians, and excuse their sins? God forbid!--Do I want to
   lower the standard of sanctification, and countenance anyone in being a
   lazy, idle soldier of Christ? God forbid!--Do I want to wipe out the
   broad line of distinction between the converted and the unconverted,
   and to wink at inconsistencies? Once more I say, God forbid!--I hold
   strongly that there is a mighty difference between the true Christian
   and the false, between the believer and the unbeliever, between the
   children of God and the children of the world. I hold strongly that
   this difference is not merely one of faith, but of life--not only one
   of profession, but of practice. I hold strongly that the ways of the
   believer should be as distinct from those of the unbeliever, as bitter
   from sweet, light from darkness, heat from cold.

   But I do want young Christians to understand what they must expect to
   find in themselves. I want to prevent their being stumbled and puzzled
   by the discovery of their own weakness and infirmity. I want them to
   see that they may have true faith and grace, in spite of all the
   devil's whispers to the contrary, though they feel within doubts and
   fears. I want them to observe that Peter, and James, and John, and
   their brethren were true disciples, and yet not so spiritual but that
   they could be afraid. I do not tell them to make the unbelief of the
   disciples an excuse for themselves. But I do tell them that it shows
   plainly, that so long as they are in the body they must not expect
   faith to be above the reach of fear.

   Above all, I want all Christians to understand what they must expect in
   other believers. You must not hastily conclude that a man has no grace
   merely because you see in him some corruption-There are spots on the
   face of the sun; and yet the sun shines brightly and enlightens the
   whole world. There is quartz and dross mixed up with many a lump of
   gold that comes from Australia; and yet who thinks the gold on that
   account worth nothing at all? There are flaws in some of the finest
   diamonds in the world; and yet they do not prevent their being rated at
   a priceless value. Away with this morbid squeamishness which makes many
   ready to excommunicate a man if he only has a few faults! Let us be
   more quick to see grace and more slow to see imperfections! Let us know
   that, if we cannot allow there is grace where there is corruption, we
   shall find no grace in the world. We are yet in the body. The devil is
   not dead. We are not yet like the angels. Heaven has not yet begun. The
   leprosy is not out of the walls of the house, however much we may
   scrape them, and never will be till the house is taken down. Our bodies
   are indeed the temple of the Holy Ghost, but not a perfect temple until
   they are raised or changed. Grace is indeed a treasure, but a treasure
   in earthen vessels. It is possible for a man to forsake all for
   Christ's sake, and yet to be overtaken occasionally with doubts and
   fears.

   I beseech every reader of this paper to remember this. It is a lesson
   worth attention. The Apostles believed in Christ, loved Christ, and
   gave up all to follow Christ. And yet you see in this storm the
   Apostles were afraid. Learn to be charitable in your judgment of them.
   Learn to be moderate in your expectations from your own heart. Contend
   to the death for the truth that no man is a true Christian who is not
   converted, and is not a holy man. But allow that a man may be
   converted, have a new heart, and be a holy man, and yet be liable to
   infirmity, doubts and fears.

   IV. Let us learn, in the fourth place, the power of the Lord Jesus
   Christ.

   You have a striking example of His power in the history upon which I am
   now dwelling. The waves were breaking into the ship where Jesus was.
   The terrified disciples awoke Him, and cried for help. "He arose and
   rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be still. And the wind
   ceased, and there was a great calm." This was a wonderful miracle. No
   one could do this but one who was almighty.

   Make the winds cease with a word! Who does not know that it is a common
   saying, in order to describe an impossibility, "You might as well speak
   to the wind!" Yet Jesus rebukes the wind and at once it ceases. This
   was power.

   Calm the waves with a voice! What reader of history does not know that
   a mighty King of England tried in vain to stop the tide rising on the
   shore? Yet here is one who says to raging waves in a storm, "Peace, be
   still," and at once there was a calm. Here was power.

   It is good for all men to have clear views of the Lord Jesus Christ's
   power. Let the sinner know that the merciful Saviour to whom he is
   urged to flee, and in whom he is invited to trust, is nothing less than
   the Almighty, and has power over all flesh to eternal life. (Rev. i. 8;
   John xvii. 2.) Let the anxious inquirer understand that if he will only
   venture on Jesus, and take up the cross, he ventures on One who has all
   power in heaven and earth. (Matt. xxviii. 18.) Let the believer
   remember as he journeys through the wilderness, that his Mediator, and
   Advocate, and Physician, and Shepherd, and Redeemer, is Lord of lords,
   and King of kings, and that through Him all things may be done. (Rev.
   xvii. 14; Phil. iv. 13.) Let all study the subject, for it deserves to
   be studied.

   (a) Study it in His works of creation. "All things were made by Him,
   and without Him was not any thing made that was made." (John i. 3.) The
   heavens and all their glorious host of inhabitants--the earth and all
   that it contains--the sea and all that is in it--all creation, from the
   sun on high to the least worm below, was the work of Christ. He spake
   and they came into being. He commanded and they began to exist. That
   very Jesus, who was born of a poor woman at Bethlehem and lived in a
   carpenter's house at Nazareth, had been the Former of all things. Was
   not this power?

   (b) Study it in His works of providence, and the orderly continuance of
   all things in the world. "By Him all things consist." (Col. i. 17.)
   Sun, moon, and stars roll round in a perfect system. Spring, summer,
   autumn, and winter follow one another in regular order. They continue
   to this day and fail not, according to the ordinance of Him who died on
   Calvary. (Psalm cxix. 91.) The kingdoms of this world rise and
   increase, and decline and pass away. The rulers of the earth plan, and
   scheme, and make laws, and change laws, and war, and pull down one and
   raise up another. But they little think that they rule only by the will
   of Jesus and that nothing happens without the permission of the Lamb of
   God. They do not know that they and their subjects are all as a drop or
   water in the hand of the crucified One, and that He increaseth the
   nations and diminishes the nations, just according to His mind. Is not
   this power?

   (c) Study the subject not least in the miracles worked by our Lord
   Jesus Christ during the three years of His ministry upon earth. Learn
   from the mighty works which He did, that the things which are
   impossible with man are possible with Christ. Regard every one of His
   miracles as an emblem and figure of spiritual things. See in it a
   lovely picture of what He is able to do for your soul. He that could
   raise the dead with a word can just as easily raise man from the death
   of sin. He that could give sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, and
   speech to the dumb, can also make sinners to see the kingdom of God,
   hear the joyful sound of the Gospel, and speak forth the praise of
   redeeming love. He that could heal leprosy with a touch, can heal any
   disease of heart. He that could cast out devils can bid every besetting
   sin yield to His grace. Oh, begin to read Christ's miracles in this
   light! Wicked, and bad, and corrupt as you may feel, take comfort in
   the thought that you are not beyond Christ's power to heal. Remember
   that in Christ there is not only a fulness of mercy, but a fulness of
   power.

   (d) Study the subject in particular as placed before you this day. I
   dare be sure your heart has sometimes been tossed to and fro like the
   waves in a storm. You have found it agitated like the waters of the
   troubled sea when it cannot rest. Come and hear this day that there is
   One who can give you rest. Jesus can say to your heart, whatever may be
   its ailment, "Peace, be still I "

   What though your conscience within be lashed by the recollection of
   countless transgressions, and torn by every gust of temptation? What
   though the remembrance of past hideous profligacy be grievous unto you,
   and the burden intolerable? What though your heart seems full of evil,
   and sin appears to drag you whither it will like a slave? What though
   the devil rides to and fro over your soul like a conqueror, and tells
   you it is vain to struggle against him, there is no hope for you? I
   tell you there is One who can give even you pardon and peace. My Lord
   and Master Jesus Christ can rebuke the devil's raging, can calm even
   your soul's misery, and say even to you, "Peace, be still!" He can
   scatter that cloud of guilt which now weighs you down. He can bid
   despair depart. He can drive fear away. He can remove the spirit of
   bondage and fill you with the spirit of adoption. Satan may hold your
   soul like a strong man armed, but Jesus is stronger than he, and when
   He commands, the prisoners must go free. Oh, if any troubled reader
   wants a calm within, let him go this day to Jesus Christ and all shall
   yet be well!

   But what if your heart be right with God, and yet you are pressed down
   with a load of earthly trouble? What if the fear of poverty is tossing
   you to and fro and seems likely to overwhelm you? What if pain of body
   be racking you to distraction day after day? What if you are suddenly
   laid aside from active usefulness, and compelled by infirmity to sit
   still and do nothing? What if death has come into your home and taken
   away your Rachael, or Joseph, or Benjamin and left you alone, crushed
   to the ground with sorrow? What if all this has happened? Still there
   is comfort in Christ. He can speak peace to wounded hearts as easily as
   calm troubled seas. He can rebuke rebellious wills as powerfully as
   raging winds. He can make storms of sorrow abate and silence tumultuous
   passions as surely as He stopped the Galilean storm. He can say to the
   heaviest anxiety, "Peace, be still!" The floods of care and tribulation
   may be mighty, but Jesus sits upon the waterfloods and is mightier than
   the waves of the sea. (Psalm xciii. 4.) The winds of trouble may howl
   fiercely round you, but Jesus holds them in His hand and can stay them
   when He lists. Oh, if any reader of this paper is broken-hearted, and
   care-worn, and sorrowful, let him go to Jesus Christ and cry to Him,
   and he shall be refreshed. "Come unto Me," He says, "all ye that labour
   and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." (Matt. xi. 28.)

   I invite all who profess and call themselves Chris dans, to take large
   views of Christ's power. Doubt anything else if you will, but never
   doubt Christ's power. Whether you do not secretly love sin, may be
   doubtful. Whether you are not privately clinging to the world, may be
   doubtful. Whether the pride of your nature is not rising against the
   idea of being saved as a poor sinner by grace, may be doubtful. But one
   thing is not doubtful, and that is that Christ is "able to save to the
   uttermost," and will save you, if you will let Him. (Heb. vii. 25.)

   V. Let us learn, in the last place, how tenderly and patiently the Lord
   Jesus deals with weak believers.

   We see this truth brought out in His words to His disciples, when the
   wind ceased and there was a calm. He might well have rebuked them
   sharply. He might well have reminded them of all the great things He
   had done for them and reproved them for their cowardice and mistrust.
   But there is nothing of anger in the Lord's words. He simply asks two
   questions. "Why are ye so fearful? How is it that ye have no faith?"

   The whole of our Lord's conduct towards His disciples on earth deserves
   close consideration, it throws a beautiful light on the compassion and
   longsuffering that there is in Him. No master surely ever had scholars
   so slow to learn their lessons as Jesus had in the Apostles. No
   scholars surely ever had so patient and forbearing a teacher as the
   Apostles had in Christ. Gather up all the evidence on this subject that
   lies scattered through the Gospels, and see the truth of what I say.

   At no time of our Lord's ministry did the disciples seem to comprehend
   fully the object of His coming into the world. The humiliation, the
   atonement, the crucifixion, were hidden things to them. The plainest
   words and clearest warnings from their Master of what was going to
   befall Him seemed to have had no effect on their minds. They understood
   not. They perceived not. It was hid from their eyes. Once Peter even
   tried to dissuade our Lord from suffering. "Be it far from Thee, Lord,"
   he said, "this shall not be unto Thee." (Matt. xvi. 22; Luke xviii. 34;
   ix. 45.)

   Frequently you will see things in their spirit and demeanour which are
   not at all to be commended. One day we are told they disputed among
   themselves who should be greatest. (Mark ix. 34.) Another day they
   considered not His miracles and their hearts were hardened. (Mark vi.
   52.) Once two of them wished to call down fire from heaven upon a
   village, because it did not receive them. (Luke ix. 54.) In the garden
   of Gethsemane the three best of them slept when they should have
   watched and prayed. In the hour of His betrayal they all forsook Him
   and fled, and worst of all, Peter, the most forward of the twelve,
   denied his Master three times with an oath.

   Even after the resurrection, you see the same unbelief and hardness of
   heart cling to them; though they saw their Lord with their eyes, and
   touched Him with their hands, even then some doubted. So weak were they
   in faith! So slow of heart were they to "believe all that the prophets
   had spoken." (Luke xxiv. 25.) So backward were they in understanding
   the meaning of our Lord's words, and actions, and life, and death.

   But what do you see in our Lord's behaviour towards these disciples all
   through His ministry? You see nothing but unchanging pity, compassion,
   kindness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, and love. He does not
   cast them off for their stupidity. He does not reject them for their
   unbelief. He does not dismiss them for ever for cowardice. He teaches
   them as they are able to bear. He leads them on step by step, as a
   nurse does an infant when it first begins to walk. He sends them kind
   messages as soon as He is risen from the dead. "Go," He said to the
   women, "Go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there they
   shall see Me." (Matt. xxviii. 10.) He gathers them round Himself once
   more. He restores Peter to his place, and bids him "feed His sheep."
   (John xxi. 17.) He condescends to sojourn with them forty days before
   He finally ascends. He commissions them to go forth as His messengers,
   and preach the Gospel to the Gentiles. He blesses them in parting, and
   encourages them with that gracious promise, "I am with you always, even
   unto the end of the world." (Matt. xxviii. 20.) Truly this was a love
   that passeth knowledge. This is not the manner of man.

   Let all the world know that the Lord Christ is very pitiful, and of
   tender mercy. He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the
   smoking flax. As a father pitieth his children, so He pitieth them that
   fear Him. As one whom his mother comforteth, so will He comfort His
   people. (James v. 11; Matt. xii. 20; Ps. ciii. 13; Isa. lxvi. 13.) He
   cares for the lambs of His flock as well as for the old sheep. He cares
   for the sick and feeble ones of His fold as well as for the strong. It
   is written that He will carry them in His bosom, rather than let one of
   them be lost. (Isaiah xl. 11.) He cares for the least members of His
   body, as well as for the greatest. He cares for the babes of His family
   as well^as the grownup men. He cares for the tenderest little plants in
   His garden as well as for the cedar of Lebanon. All are in His book of
   life, and all are under His charge. All are given to Him in an
   everlasting covenant, and He has undertaken, in spite of all
   weaknesses, to bring every one safe home. Only let a sinner lay hold on
   Christ by faith and then, however feeble, Christ's word is pledged to
   him, "I will never leave thee nor forsake thee." He may correct him
   occasionally in love. He may gently reprove him at times. But He will
   never, never give him up. The devil shall never pluck him from Christ's
   hand.

   Let all the world know that the Lord Jesus will not cast away His
   believing people because of shortcomings and infirmities. The husband
   does not put away his wife because he finds failings in her. The mother
   does not forsake her infant because it is weak, feeble and ignorant.
   And the Lord Christ does not cast off poor sinners who have committed
   their souls into His hands because He sees in them blemishes and
   imperfections. Oh, no! It is His glory to pass over the faults of His
   people, and heal their backslidings--to make much of their weak graces
   and to pardon their many faults. The eleventh of Hebrews is a wonderful
   chapter. It is marvellous to observe how the Holy Ghost speaks of the
   worthies whose names are recorded in that chapter. The faith of the
   Lord's people is there brought forward and had in remembrance. But the
   faults of many a one, which might easily have been brought up also, are
   left alone, and not mentioned at all.

   Who is there now among the readers of this paper that feels desires
   after salvation, but is afraid to become decided, lest by-and-by he
   should fall away? Consider, I beseech you, the tenderness and patience
   of the Lord Jesus and be afraid no more. Fear not to take up the cross
   and come out boldly from the world. That same Lord and Saviour who bore
   with the disciples is ready and willing to bear with you. If you
   stumble, He will raise you. If you err, He will gently bring you back.
   If you faint, He will revive you. He will not lead you out of Egypt,
   and then suffer you to perish in the wilderness. He will conduct you
   safe into the promised land. Only commit yourself to His guidance, and
   then, my soul for yours, He shall carry you safe home. Only hear
   Christ's voice, and follow Him, and you shall never perish.

   Who is there among the readers of this paper that has been converted
   and desires to do his Lord's will? Take example, this day, by your
   Master's gentleness and long-suffering, and learn to be tender-hearted
   and kind to others. Deal gently with young beginners. Do not expect
   them to know everything and understand everything all at once. Take
   them by the hand. Lead them on and encourage them. Believe all things,
   and hope all things, rather than make that heart sad which God would
   not have made sad. Deal gently with backsliders. Do not turn your back
   on them as if their case was hopeless. Use every lawful means to
   restore them to their former place. Consider yourself, and your often
   infirmities, and do as you would be done by. Alas, there is a painful
   absence of the Master's mind among many of His disciples. There are few
   churches, I fear, in the present day, which would have received Peter
   into communion again for many a long year, after denying His Lord.
   There are few believers ready to do the work of Barnabas--willing to
   take young converts by the hand, and encourage them at their first
   beginnings. Verily we want an outpouring of the Spirit upon believers
   almost as much as upon the world.

   And now, I have only to ask my readers to make a practical use of the
   lessons I have brought before them. You have heard this day five
   things.

   First. That Christ's service will not secure you against troubles. The
   holiest saints are liable to them.

   Second. That Christ is very Man as well as God.

   Third. That believers may have much weakness and infirmity, and yet be
   true believers.

   Fourth. That Christ has all power: and

   Fifth. That Christ is full of patience and kindness towards His people.
   Remember these five lessons, and you will do well.

   Bear with me a few moments while I say a few words to impress the
   things you have been reading more deeply on your heart.

   (1) This paper will very likely be read by some who know nothing of
   Christ's service by experience, or of Christ Himself.

   There are only too many who take no interest whatever in the things
   about which I have been writing. Their treasure is all below. They are
   wholly taken up with the things of the world. They care nothing about
   the believer's conflict, and struggles, and infirmities, and doubts,
   and fears.

   They care little whether Christ did miracles or not. It is all a matter
   of words, and names, and forms, about which they do not trouble
   themselves. They are without God in the world.

   If perchance you are such a man as this, I can only warn you solemnly
   that your present course cannot last. You will not live for ever. There
   must be an end. Grey hairs, age, sickness, infirmities, death--all, all
   are before you, and must be met one day. What will you do when that day
   comes?

   Remember my words this day. You will find no comfort when sick and
   dying, unless Jesus Christ is your friend. You will, discover, to your
   sorrow and confusion, that however much men may talk and boast, they
   cannot do without Christ when they come to their deathbed. You may send
   for ministers, and get them to read prayers, and give you the
   sacrament. You may go through every form and ceremony of Christianity.
   But if you persist in living a careless and worldly life, and despising
   Christ in the morning of your days, you must not be surprised if Christ
   leaves you to yourself in your latter end. Alas! these are solemn
   words, and are often sadly fulfilled: "I will laugh at your calamity; I
   will mock when your fear cometh." (Prov. i. 26.)

   Come then, this day, and be advised by one who loves your soul. Cease
   to do evil. Learn to do well. Forsake the foolish, and go in the path
   of understanding. Cast away that pride which hangs about your heart,
   and seek the Lord Jesus while He may be found. Cast away that spiritual
   sloth which is palsying your soul, and resolve to take trouble about
   your Bible, your prayers, and your Sundays. Break off from a world
   which can never really satisfy you, and seek that treasure which alone
   is truly incorruptible. Oh, that the Lord's own words might find a
   place in your conscience! "How long, ye simple ones, will ye love
   simplicity? and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate
   knowledge? Turn you at my reproof: behold I will pour out my Spirit
   unto you, I will make known my words unto you." (Prov. i. 22, 23.) I
   believe the crowning sin of Judas Iscariot was that he would not seek
   pardon and turn again to his Lord. Beware, lest that be your sin also.

   (2) This paper will probably fall into the hands of some who love the
   Lord Jesus, and believe in Him, and yet desire to love Him better.

   If you are such a man, suffer the word of exhortation and apply it to
   your heart.

   For one thing, keep before your mind, as an ever-present truth, that
   the Lord Jesus is an actual, living Person, and deal with Him as such.

   I fear the personality of our Lord is sadly lost sight of by many
   professors in the present day. Their talk is more about salvation than
   about the Saviour--more about redemption than about the Redeemer--more
   about justification than about Jesus--more about Christ's work than
   about Christ's person. This a great fault, and one that fully accounts
   for the dry and sapless character of the religion of many professors.

   As ever, you would grow in grace and have joy and peace in believing,
   beware of falling into this error. Cease to regard the Gospel as a mere
   collection of dry doctrines. Look at it rather as the revelation of a
   mighty, living Being in whose sight you are daily to live. Cease to
   regard it as a mere set of abstract propositions and abstruse
   principles and rules. Look at it as the introduction to a glorious,
   personal Friend. This is the kind of Gospel that the Apostles preached.
   They did not go about the world telling men of love, and mercy, and
   pardon, in the abstract. The leading subject of all their sermons was
   the loving heart of an actual living Christ. This is the kind of Gospel
   which is most calculated to promote sanctification and meetness for
   glory. Nothing, surely, is so likely to prepare us for that heaven
   where Christ's personal presence will be all, and that glory where we
   shall meet Christ face to face, as to realize communion with Christ, as
   an actual living Person here on earth. There is all the difference in
   the world between an idea and a person.

   For another thing, try to keep before your mind, as an ever-present
   truth, that the Lord Jesus is utterly unchanged.

   That Saviour, in whom you trust, is the same yesterday, to-day, and for
   ever. He knows no variableness, nor shadow of turning. Though high in
   heaven at God's right hand, He is just the same in heart that He was
   1900 years ago on earth. Remember this and you will do well.

   Follow Him all through Pits journeys to and fro in Palestine. Mark how
   He received all that came to Him and cast out none. Mark how He had an
   ear to listen to every tale of sorrow, a hand to help every case of
   distress, a heart to feel for all who needed sympathy. And then say to
   yourself, "This same Jesus is He who is my Lord and Saviour. Place and
   time have made no difference in Him. What He was, He is, and will be
   for evermore."

   Surely this thought will give life and reality to your daily religion.
   Surely this thought will give substance and shape to your expectation
   of good things to come. Surely it is matter for joyful reflection, that
   He who was thirty-three years upon earth, and whose life we read in the
   Gospels, is the very Saviour in whose presence we shall spend eternity.

   The last word of this paper shall be the same as the first. I want men
   to read the four Gospels more than they do. I want men to become better
   acquainted with Christ. I want unconverted men to know Jesus, that they
   may have eternal life through Him. I want believers to know Jesus
   better, that they may become more happy, more holy, and more meet for
   the inheritance of the saints in light. He will be the holiest man who
   learns to say with St. Paul, "To me to live is Christ." (Phil. i. 21.)
     __________________________________________________________________

XIII.
THE CHURCH WHICH CHRIST BUILDS

   "Upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not
   prevail against it."--Matt. xvi. 18.

   DO we belong to the Church which is built upon a rock? Are we members
   of the only Church in which our souls can be saved?--These are serious
   questions. They deserve serious consideration. I ask the attention of
   all who read this paper, while I try to show the one true, holy,
   Catholic Church, and to guide men's feet into the only safe fold. "What
   is this Church? What is it like? What are its marks? Where is it to be
   found?" On all these points I have something to say. I am going to
   unfold the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, which stand at the head of
   this page. He declares, "Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the
   gates of hell shall not prevail against it."

   There are five things in these famous words which demand our
   attention:--

   I. A Building: "My Church."

   II. A Builder: Christ says, "I will build my Church."

   III. A Foundation: "Upon this rock I will build my Church."

   IV. Perils Implied: "The gates of hell."

   V. Security Asserted: "The gates of hell shall not prevail against it."

   The whole subject demands special attention in the present day.
   Holiness, we must never forget, is the prominent characteristic of all
   who belong to the one true Church.

   I. We have, firstly, a Building mentioned in the text. The Lord Jesus
   Christ speaks of "my Church."

   Now what is this Church? Few inquiries can be made of more importance
   than this. For want of due attention to this subject, the errors that
   have crept into the world are neither few nor small.

   The Church of our text is no material building. It is no temple made
   with hands of wood, or brick, or stone, or marble. It is a company of
   men and women.--It is no particular visible Church on earth. It is not
   the Eastern Church or the Western Church. It is not the Church of
   England or the Church of Scotland.--Above all, it certainly is not the
   Church of Rome. The Church of our text is one that makes far less show
   than any visible Church in the eyes of man, but is of far more
   importance in the eyes of God.

   The Church of our text is made up of all true believers in the Lord
   Jesus Christ, of all who are really holy and converted people. It
   comprehends all who have repented of sin, and fled to Christ by faith,
   and been made new creatures in Him. It comprises all God's elect, all
   who have received God's grace, all who have been washed in Christ's
   blood, all who have been clothed in Christ's righteousness, all who
   have been born again and sanctified by Christ's Spirit. All such, of
   every name, and rank, and nation, and people, and tongue, compose the
   Church of our text. This is the body of Christ. This is the flock of
   Christ. This is the bride. This is the Lamb's wife. This is "the holy
   Catholic and Apostolic Church" of the Apostles' Creed and the Nicene
   Creed. This is "the blessed company of all faithful people," spoken of
   in the Communion Service of the Church of England. This is "THE CHURCH
   ON THE ROCK."

   The members of this Church do not all worship God in the same way, or
   use the same form of government. Some of them are governed by bishops
   and some of them by elders. Some of them use a prayer-book when they
   meet for public worship and some of them use none. The thirty-fourth
   Article of the Church of England most wisely declares, "It is not
   necessary that ceremonies should be in all places one and alike." But
   the members of this Church all come to one throne of grace. They all
   worship with one heart. They are all led by one Spirit. They are all
   really and truly holy. They can all say "Alleluia," and they can all
   reply, "Amen."

   This is that Church to which all visible churches on earth are servants
   and handmaidens. Whether they are Episcopalian, Independent, or
   Presbyterian, they all serve the interests of the one true Church. They
   are the scaffolding behind which the great building is carried on. They
   are the husk under which the living kernel grows. They have their
   various degrees of usefulness. The best and worthiest of them is that
   which trains up most members for Christ's true Church. But no visible
   church has any right to say, "We are the only True Church. We are the
   men, and wisdom shall die with us." No visible Church should ever dare
   to say, "We shall stand for ever. The gates of hell shall not prevail
   against me."

   This is that Church to which belong the Lord's gracious promises of
   preservation, continuance, protection, and final glory.--"Whatsoever,"
   says Hooker, "we read in Scripture concerning the endless love and
   saving mercy which God showeth towards His Churches, the only proper
   subject thereof is this Church, which we properly term the mystical
   body of Christ."--Small and despised as the true Church may be in this
   world, it is precious and honourable in the sight of God. The temple of
   Solomon in all its glory was mean and contemptible in comparison with
   that Church which is built upon a rock.

   I trust the things I have just been saying will sink down into the
   minds of all who read this paper. See that you hold sound doctrine upon
   the subject of "the Church." A mistake here may lead on to dangerous
   and soul-ruining errors. The Church which is made up of true believers
   is the Church for which we, who are ministers, are specially ordained
   to preach. The Church which comprises all who repent and believe the
   Gospel is the Church to which we desire you to belong. Our work is not
   done, and our hearts are not satisfied until you are made a new
   creature, and are a member of the one true Church. Outside of the
   Church which is "built on the rock" there can be NO SALVATION.

   II. I pass on to the second point to which I propose to invite your
   attention. Our text contains not merely a building, but a Builder. The
   Lord Jesus Christ declares, "I will build my Church."

   The true Church of Christ is tenderly cared for by all the three
   Persons in the blessed Trinity. In the plan of salvation revealed in
   the Bible, beyond doubt God the Father chooses, God the Son redeems,
   and God the Holy Ghost sanctifies every member of Christ's mystical
   body. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, three
   Persons and one God, co-operate for the salvation of every saved soul.
   This is truth, which ought never to be forgotten. Nevertheless, there
   is a peculiar sense in which the help of the Church is laid on the Lord
   Jesus Christ. He is peculiarly and pre-eminently the Redeemer and
   Saviour of the Church. Therefore it is that we find Him saying in our
   text, "I will build--the work of building is my special work."

   It is Christ who calls the members of the Church in due time. They are
   "the called of Jesus Christ." (Rom. i. 6.) It is Christ who quickens
   them. "The Son quickeneth whom He will." (John v. 21.) It is Christ who
   washes away their sins. He "has loved us, and washed us from our sins
   in His own blood." (Rev. i. 5.) It is Christ who gives them peace.
   "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you." (John xiv. 27.) It
   is Christ who gives them eternal life. "I give unto them eternal life,
   and they shall never perish." (John x. 28.) It is Christ who grants
   them repentance. "Him hath God exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour, to
   give repentance." (Acts v. 31.) It is Christ who enables them to become
   God's children. "To as many as received Him, to them gave He power to
   become the sons of God." (John i. 12.) It is Christ who carries on the
   work within them when it is begun "Because I live, ye shall live also."
   (John xiv. 19.) In short, it has "pleased the Father that in Christ
   should all fullness dwell." (Coloss. i. 19.) He is the author and
   finisher of faith. He is the life. He is the head. From Him every joint
   and member of the mystical body of Christians is supplied. Through Him
   they are kept from falling. He shall preserve them to the end, and
   present them faultless before the Father's throne with exceeding great
   joy. He is all things in all believers.

   The mighty agent by whom the Lord Jesus Christ carries out this work in
   the members of His Church is without doubt the Holy Ghost. He it is who
   is ever renewing, awakening, convincing, leading to the cross,
   transforming, taking out of the world stone after stone, and adding to
   the mystical building. But the great chief Builder, who has undertaken
   to execute the work of redemption and bring it to completion, is the
   Son of God, the "Word who was made flesh." It is Jesus Christ who
   "builds."

   In building the true Church, the Lord Jesus condescends to use many
   subordinate instruments. The ministry of the Gospel, the circulation of
   the Scriptures, the friendly rebuke, the word spoken in season, the
   drawing influence of afflictions--all, all are means and appliances by
   which His work is carried on, and the Spirit conveys life to souls. But
   Christ is the great superintending Architect, ordering, guiding,
   directing all that is done. Paul may plant, and Apollos water, but God
   giveth the increase, (1 Cor. iii. 6.) Ministers may preach and writers
   may write, but the Lord Jesus Christ alone can build. And except He
   builds, the work stands still.

   Great is the wisdom wherewith the Lord Jesus Christ builds His Church!
   All is done at the right time, and in the right way. Each stone in its
   turn is put in its right place. Sometimes He chooses great stones, and
   sometimes He chooses small stones. Sometimes the work goes on fast, and
   sometimes it goes on slowly. Man is frequently impatient and thinks
   that nothing is doing. But man's time is not God's time. A thousand
   years in His sight are but as a single day. The great Builder makes no
   mistakes. He knows what He is doing. He sees the end from the
   beginning. He works by a perfect, unalterable, and certain plan. The
   mightiest conceptions of architects, like Michelangelo and Wren, are
   mere trifling and child's play in comparison with Christ's wise
   counsels respecting His Church.

   Great is the condescension and mercy which Christ exhibits in building
   His Church! He often chooses the most unlikely and roughest stones, and
   fits them into a most excellent work. He despises none, and rejects
   none, on account of former sins and past transgressions. He often makes
   Pharisees and Publicans become pillars of His house. He delights to
   show mercy. He often takes the most thoughtless and ungodly, and
   transforms them into polished corners of His spiritual temple.

   Great is the power which Christ displays in building His Church! He
   carries on His work in spite of opposition from the world, the flesh,
   and the devil. In storm, in tempest, through troublous times, silently,
   quietly, without noise, without stir, without excitement, the building
   progresses, like Solomon's temple. "I will work," He declares, "and who
   shall let it?" (Isaiah xliii. 13.)

   The children of this world take little or no interest in the building
   of this Church. They care nothing for the conversion of souls. What are
   broken spirits and penitent hearts to them? What is conviction of sin,
   or faith in the Lord Jesus to them? It is all "foolishness" in their
   eyes. But while the children of this world care nothing, there is joy
   in the presence of the angels of God. For the preserving of the true
   Church, the laws of nature have oftentimes been suspended. For the good
   of that Church, all the providential dealings of God in this world are
   ordered and arranged. For the elect's sake, wars are brought to an end,
   and peace is given to a nation. Statesmen, rulers, emperors, kings,
   presidents, heads of governments, have their schemes and plans, and
   think them of vast importance. But there is another work going on of
   infinitely greater moment, for which they are only the "axes and saws"
   in God's hands. (Isai. x. 15.) That work is the erection of Christ's
   spiritual temple, the gathering in of living stones into the one true
   Church.

   We ought to feel deeply thankful that the building of the true Church
   is laid on the shoulders of One that is mighty. If the work depended on
   man, it would soon stand still. But, blessed be God, the work is in the
   hands of a Builder who never fails to accomplish His designs! Christ is
   the almighty Builder. He will carry on His work, though nations and
   visible Churches may not know their duty. Christ will never fail. That
   which He has undertaken He will certainly accomplish.

   III.--I pass on to the third point which I propose to consider--The
   Foundation upon which this Church is built. The Lord Jesus Christ tells
   us, "Upon this rock will I build my Church."

   What did the Lord Jesus Christ mean when He spoke of this foundation?
   Did He mean the Apostle Peter, to whom He was speaking? I think
   assuredly not. I can see no reason, if He meant Peter, why He did not
   say, "Upon thee" will I build my Church. If He had meant Peter, He
   would surely have said, I will build my Church on thee, as plainly as
   He said, "to thee will I give the keys."--No, it was not the person of
   the Apostle Peter, but the good confession which the Apostle had just
   made! It was not Peter, the erring, unstable man, but the mighty truth
   which the Father had revealed to Peter. It was the truth concerning
   Jesus Christ Himself which was the rock. It was Christ's Mediatorship,
   and Christ's Messiahship. It was the blessed truth that Jesus was the
   promised Saviour, the true Surety, the real Intercessor between God and
   man. This was the rock, and this the foundation, upon which the Church
   of Christ was to be built.

   The foundation of the true Church was laid at a mighty cost. It needed
   that the Son of God should take our nature upon Him, and in that nature
   live, suffer, and die, not for His own sins, but for ours. It needed
   that in that nature Christ should go to the grave, and rise again. It
   needed that in that nature Christ should go up to heaven, to sit at the
   right hand of God, having obtained eternal redemption for all His
   people. No other foundation could have met the necessities of lost,
   guilty, corrupt, weak, helpless sinners.

   That foundation, once obtained, is very strong. It can bear the weight
   of the sins of all the world. It has borne the weight of all the sins
   of all the believers who have built on it. Sins of thought, sins of the
   imagination, sins of the heart, sins of the head, sins which everyone
   has seen, and sins which no man knows, sins against God, and sins
   against man, sins of all kinds and descriptions--that mighty rock can
   bear the weight of all these sins, and not give way. The mediatorial
   office of Christ is a remedy sufficient for all the sins of all the
   world.

   To this one foundation every member of Christ's true Church is joined.
   In many things believers are disunited and disagreed. In the matter of
   their soul's foundation they are all of one mind. Whether Episcopalians
   or Presbyterians, Baptists or Methodists, believers all meet at one
   point. They are all built on the rock. Ask where they get their peace,
   and hope, and joyful expectation of good things to come. You will find
   that all flows from that one mighty source, Christ the Mediator between
   God and man, and the office that Christ holds, as the High Priest and
   Surety of sinners.

   Look to your foundation, if you would know whether or not you are a
   member of the one true Church. It is a point that may be known to
   yourself. Your public worship we can see; but we cannot see whether you
   are personally built upon the rock. Your attendance at the Lord's table
   we can see; but we cannot see whether you are joined to Christ, and one
   with Christ, and Christ in you. Take heed that you make no mistake
   about your own personal salvation. See that your own soul is upon the
   rock. Without this, all else is nothing. Without this, you will never
   stand in the day of judgment. Better a thousand times in that day to be
   found in a cottage "upon the rock," than in a palace upon the sand!

   IV. I proceed in the fourth place to speak of the Implied Trials of the
   Church, to which our text refers. There is mention made of "the gates
   of hell." By that expression we are meant to understand the power of
   the prince of hell, even the devil. (Compare Psalm ix. 13; cvii. 18;
   Isa. xxxviii. 10.)

   The history of Christ's true Church has always been one of conflict and
   war. It has been constantly assailed by a deadly enemy, Satan, the
   prince of this world. The devil hates the true Church of Christ with an
   undying hatred. He is ever stirring up opposition against all its
   members. He is ever urging the children of this world to do his will,
   and to injure and harass the people of God. If he cannot bruise the
   head, he will bruise the heel. If he cannot rob the believers of
   heaven, he will vex them by the way.

   Warfare with the powers of hell has been the experience of the whole
   body of Christ for six thousand years. It has always been a bush
   burning, though not consumed--a woman fleeing into the wilderness, but
   not swallowed up. (Exod. iii. 2; Rev. xii. 6, 16.) The visible Churches
   have their times of prosperity and seasons of peace, but never has
   there been a time of peace for the true Church. Its conflict is
   perpetual. Its battle never ends.

   Warfare with the powers of hell is the experience of every individual
   member of the true Church. Each has to fight. What are the lives of all
   the saints, but records of battles? What were such men as Paul, and
   James, and Peter, and John, and Polycarp, and Chrysostom, and
   Augustine, and Luther, and Calvin, and Latimer, and Baxter, but
   soldiers engaged in a constant warfare? Sometimes the persons of the
   saints have been assailed, and sometimes their property. Sometimes they
   have been harassed by calumnies and slanders, and sometimes by open
   persecution. But in one way or another the devil has been continually
   warring against the Church. The "gates of hell" have been continually
   assaulting the people of Christ.

   We who preach the Gospel can hold out to all who come to Christ,
   "exceeding great and precious promises." (2 Pet. i. 4.) We can offer
   boldly to you, in our Master's name, the peace of God which passeth all
   understanding. Mercy, free grace, and full salvation, are offered to
   every one who will come to Christ, and believe on Him. But we promise
   you no peace with the world, or with the devil. We warn you, on the
   contrary, that there must be warfare so long as you are in the body. We
   would not keep you back, or deter you from Christ's service. But we
   would have you "count the cost," and fully understand what Christ's
   service entails. (Luke xiv. 28.)

   (a) Marvel not at the enmity of the gates of hell. "If ye were of the
   world, the world would love his own." (John xv. 19.) So long as the
   world is the world, and the devil the devil, so long there must be
   warfare, and believers in Christ must be soldiers. The world hated
   Christ, and the world will hate true Christians, as long as the earth
   stands. As the great reformer, Luther, said, "Cain will go on murdering
   Abel so long as the Church is on earth."

   (b) Be prepared for the enmity of the gates of hell. Put on the whole
   armour of God. The tower of David contains a thousand bucklers, all
   ready for the use of God's people. The weapons of our warfare have been
   tried by millions of poor sinners like ourselves, and have never been
   found to fail.

   (c) Be patient under the enmity of the gates of hell. It is all working
   together for your good. It tends to sanctify. It will keep you awake.
   It will make you humble. It will drive you nearer to the Lord Jesus
   Christ. It will wean you from the world. It will help to make you pray
   more. Above all, it will make you long for heaven. It will teach you to
   say with heart as well as lips, "Come, Lord Jesus. Thy kingdom come."

   (d) Be not cast down by the enmity of hell. The warfare of the true
   child of God is as much a mark of grace as the inward peace which he
   enjoys. No cross, no crown! No conflict, no saving Christianity!
   "Blessed are ye," said our Lord Jesus Christ, "when men shall revile
   you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely,
   for my sake." If you are never persecuted for religion's sake, and all
   men speak well of you, you may well doubt whether you belong to "the
   Church on the rock." (Matt. v. 11; Luke vi. 26.)

   V. There remains one thing more to be considered--the Security of the
   true Church of Christ. There is a glorious promise given by the
   Builder, "The gates of hell shall not prevail."

   He who cannot lie has pledged His word that all the powers of hell
   shall never overthrow His Church. It shall continue, and stand, in
   spite of every assault. It shall never be overcome. All other created
   things perish and pass away, but not the Church which is built on the
   rock.

   Empires have risen and fallen in rapid succession. Egypt, Assyria,
   Babylon, Persia, Tyre, Carthage, Rome, Greece, Venice.--Where are all
   these now? They were all the creations of man's hand, and have passed
   away. But the true Church of Christ lives on.

   The mightiest cities have become heaps of ruins. The broad walls of
   Babylon have sunk to the ground. The palaces of Nineveh are covered
   with mounds of dust. The hundred gates of Thebes are only matters of
   history. Tyre is a place where fishermen hang their nets. Carthage is a
   desolation. Yet all this time the true Church stands. The gates of hell
   do not prevail against it.

   The earliest visible Churches have in many cases decayed and perished.
   Where is the Church of Ephesus and the Church of Antioch? Where is the
   Church of Alexandria and the Church of Constantinople? Where are the
   Corinthian, and Philippian, and Thessalonian Churches? Where, indeed,
   are they all? They departed from the Word of God. They were proud of
   their bishops, and synods, and ceremonies, and learning, and antiquity.
   They did not glory in the true cross of Christ. They did not hold fast
   the Gospel. They did not give the Lord Jesus His rightful office, or
   faith its rightful place. They are now among the things that have been.
   Their candlestick has been taken away. But all this time the true
   Church has lived on.

   Has the true Church been oppressed in one country? It has fled to
   another.--Has it been trampled on and oppressed in one soil? It has
   taken root and flourished in some other climate.--Fire, sword, prisons,
   fines, penalties, have never been able to destroy its vitality. Its
   persecutors have died and gone to their own place, but the Word of God
   has lived, and grown, and multiplied. Weak as this true Church may
   appear to the eye of man, it is an anvil which has broken many a hammer
   in times past, and perhaps will break many more before the end. "He
   that lays hands on it, is touching the apple of his eye." (Zech. ii.
   8.)

   The promise of our text is true of the whole body of the true Church.
   Christ will never be without witness in the world. He has had a people
   in the worst of times. He had seven thousand in Israel even in the days
   of Ahab. There are some now, I believe, in dark places of the Roman and
   Greek Churches, who, in spite of much weakness, are serving Christ. The
   devil may rage horribly. The Church in some countries may be brought
   exceedingly low. But the gates of hell shall never entirely "prevail."

   The promise of our text is true of every individual member of the
   Church. Some of God's people have been so much cast down and
   disquieted, that they have despaired of their safety. Some have fallen
   sadly, as David and Peter did. Some have departed from the faith for a
   time, like Cranmer and Jewell. Many have been tried by cruel doubts and
   fears. But all have got safe home at last, the youngest as well as the
   oldest, the weakest as well as the strongest.--And so it will be to the
   end. Can you prevent tomorrow's sun from rising? Can you prevent the
   tide in the Bristol Channel from ebbing and flowing? Can you prevent
   the planets moving in their respective orbits? Then, and then alone,
   can you prevent the salvation of any believer, however feeble--the
   final safety of any living stone in that Church which is built upon the
   rock, however small or insignificant that stone may appear.

   The true Church is Christ's body. Not one bone in that mystical body
   shall ever be broken.--The true Church is Christ's bride. Those whom
   God has joined in everlasting covenant, shall never be put
   asunder.--The true Church is Christ's flock. When the lion came and
   took a lamb out of David's flock, David arose and delivered the lamb
   from his mouth. Christ will do the same. He is David's greater son. Not
   a single sick lamb in Christ's flock shall perish. He will say to His
   Father in the last day, "Of them which Thou gavest Me I have lost
   none." (John xviii. 9.)--The true Church is the wheat of the earth. It
   may be sifted, winnowed, buffeted, tossed to and fro. But not one grain
   shall! be lost. The tares and chaff shall be burned. The wheat shall be
   gathered into the barn.--The true Church is Christ's army. The Captain
   of our salvation loses none of His soldiers. His plans are never
   defeated. His supplies never fail. His muster-roll is the same at the
   end as it was at the beginning. Of the men that marched gallantly out
   of England many years ago in the Crimean war, how many ever came back!
   Regiments that went forth, strong and cheerful, with bands playing and
   banners flying, laid their bones in a foreign land and never returned
   to their native country. But it is not so with Christ's army. Not one
   of His soldiers shall be missing at last. He Himself declares, "They
   shall never perish." (John x. 28.)

   The devil may cast some of the members of the true Church into prison.
   He may kill, and burn, and torture, and hang. But after he has killed
   the body, there is nothing more that he can do. He cannot hurt the
   soul. When the French troops took Rome years ago, they found on the
   walls of a prison cell, under the Inquisition, the words of a prisoner.
   Who he was, we know not. But his words are worthy of remembrance.
   "Though dead, he yet speaketh." He had written on the walls, very
   likely after an unjust trial and a still more unjust excommunication,
   the following striking words:--"Blessed Jesus, they cannot cast me out
   of Thy true Church." That record is true! Not all the power of Satan
   can cast out of Christ's true Church one single believer.

   I trust that no reader of this paper will ever allow fear to prevent
   his beginning to serve Christ. He to whom you commit your soul has all
   power in heaven and earth, and He will keep you. He will never let you
   be cast away. Relatives may oppose. Neighbours may mock. The world may
   slander, and ridicule, and jest, and sneer. Fear not! Fear not! The
   powers of hell shall never prevail against your soul. Greater is He
   that is for you, than all they that are against you.

   Fear not for the Church of Christ when ministers die, and saints are
   taken away. Christ can ever maintain His own cause. He will raise up
   better servants and brighter stars. The stars are all in His right
   hand. Leave off all anxious thought about the future. Cease to be cast
   down by the measures of statesmen, or the plots of wolves in sheep's
   clothing. Christ will ever provide for His own Church. Christ will take
   care that "The gates of hell shall not prevail against it." All is
   going on well, though our eyes may not see it. The kingdoms of this
   world shall yet become the kingdoms of our God, and of His Christ.

   I will now conclude this paper with a few words of practical
   application.

   (1) My first word of application shall be a question. What shall that
   question be? What shall I ask? I will return to the point with which I
   began. I will go back to the first sentence with which I opened my
   paper. I ask you, whether you are a member of the one true Church of
   Christ? Are you in the highest, the best sense, a "churchman" in the
   sight of God? You know now what I mean. I look far beyond the Church of
   England. I am not speaking of church or chapel. I speak of "the Church
   built upon the rock." I ask you, with all solemnity--Are you a member
   of that Church? Are you joined to the great Foundation? Are you on the
   rock? Have you received the Holy Ghost? Does the Spirit witness with
   your spirit, that you are one with Christ, and Christ with you?--I
   beseech you, in the name of God, to lay to heart these questions, and
   to ponder them well. If you are not converted, you do not yet belong to
   the "Church of the Rock."

   Let every reader of this paper take heed to himself, if he cannot give
   a satisfactory answer to my inquiry. Take heed, take heed, that you do
   not make shipwreck of your soul to all eternity. Take heed, lest at
   last the gates of hell prevail against you, the devil claim you as his
   own, and you be cast away for ever. Take heed, lest you go down to the
   pit from the land of Bibles, and in the full light of Christ's Gospel.
   Take heed, lest you are found at the left hand of Christ at last--a
   lost Episcopalian or a lost Presbyterian, a lost Baptist or a lost
   Methodist--lost because, with all your zeal for your own party and your
   own communion table, you never joined the one true Church.

   (2) My second word of application shall be an invitation. I address it
   to every one who is not yet a true believer. I say to you, come and
   join the one true Church without delay. Come and join yourself to the
   Lord Jesus Christ in an everlasting covenant not to be forgotten.

   Consider well what I say. I charge you solemnly not to mistake the
   meaning of my invitation. I do not bid you leave the visible Church to
   which you belong. I abhor all idolatry of forms and parties. I detest a
   proselytising spirit. But I do bid you come to Christ and be saved. The
   day of decision must come some time. Why not this very hour? Why not
   to-day, while it is called to-day?--Why not this very night, ere the
   sun rises to-morrow morning?--Come to Him who died for sinners on the
   cross, and invites all sinners to come to Him by faith and be saved.
   Come to my Master, Jesus Christ. Come, I say, for all things are now
   ready. Mercy is ready for you. Heaven is ready for you. Angels are
   ready to rejoice over you. Christ is ready to receive you. Christ will
   receive you gladly, and welcome you among His children. Come into the
   ark.--The flood of God's wrath will soon break upon the earth; come
   into the ark and be safe.

   Come into the lifeboat of the one true Church. This old world will soon
   break into pieces! Hear you not the tremblings of it? The world is but
   a wreck hard upon a sandbank. The night is far spent--the waves are
   beginning to rise--the wind is getting up--the storm will soon shatter
   the old wreck. But the lifeboat is launched, and we, the ministers of
   the Gospel, beseech you to come into the lifeboat and be saved.--We
   beseech you to arise at once and come to Christ.

   Dost thou ask, "How can I come? My sins are too many. I am too wicked
   yet. I dare not come."--Away with the thought! It is a temptation of
   Satan. Come to Christ as a sinner. Come just as you are. Hear the words
   of that beautiful hymn:--


   "Just as I am, without one plea,

   But that Thy blood was shed for me,

   And that Thou bid'st me come to Thee,

   O Lamb of God I come."

   This is the way to come to Christ. You should come waiting for nothing
   and tarrying for nothing. You should come as a hungry sinner to be
   filled--as a poor sinner to be enriched--as a bad, undeserving sinner
   to be clothed with righteousness. So coming, Christ would receive you.
   "Him that cometh" to Christ, He "will in no wise cast out." Oh I come,
   come to Jesus Christ. Come into "the true Church" by faith and be
   saved.

   (3) Last of all, let me give a word of exhortation to all believers
   into whose hands this paper may fall.

   Strive to live a holy life. Walk worthy of the Church to which you
   belong. Live like citizens of heaven. Let your light shine before men,
   so that the world may profit by your conduct. Let them know whose you
   are, and whom you serve. Be epistles of Christ, known and read of all
   men--written in such clear letters that none can say of you, "I know
   not whether this man be a member of Christ or not." He that knows
   nothing of real, practical holiness is no member of "the Church on the
   Rock,"

   Strive to live a courageous life. Confess Christ before men. Whatever
   station you occupy, in that station confess Christ. Why should you be
   ashamed of Him? He was not ashamed of you on the cross. He is ready to
   confess you now before His Father in heaven. Why should you be ashamed
   of Him? Be bold. Be very bold. The good soldier is not ashamed of his
   uniform. The true believer ought never to be ashamed of Christ.

   Strive to live a joyful life. Live like men who look for that blessed
   hope--the second coming of Jesus Christ. This is the prospect to which
   we should all look forward. It is not so much the thought of going to
   heaven as of heaven coming to us, that should fill our minds. "There is
   a good time coming" for all the people of God--a good time for all the
   Church of Christ--a good time for all believers--a bad time for the
   impenitent and unbelieving, but a good time for true Christians. For
   that good time, let us wait, and watch, and pray.

   The scaffolding will soon be taken down.--The last stone will soon be
   brought out.--The top-stone will be placed upon the edifice. Yet a
   little time, and the full beauty of the Church which Christ is building
   shall be clearly seen.

   The great Master Builder will soon come Himself. A building shall be
   shown to assembled worlds in which there shall be no imperfection. The
   Saviour and the saved shall rejoice together. The whole universe shall
   acknowledge that in the building of Christ's Church all was well done.
   "Blessed"--it shall be said in that day, if it was never said
   before--"BLESSED ARE ALL THEY WHO BELONG TO THE CHURCH ON THE ROCK!"
     __________________________________________________________________

XIV.
VISIBLE CHURCHES WARNED

   "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
   Churches."--Rev. iii. 22.

   I SUPPOSE I may take it for granted that every reader of this paper
   belongs to some visible Church of Christ. I do not ask now whether you
   are an Episcopalian, or a Presbyterian, or an Independent. I only
   suppose that you would not like to be called an Atheist or an Infidel.
   You attend the public worship of some visible, particular, or national
   body of professing Christians.

   Now, whatever the name of your Church may be, I invite your special
   attention to the verse of Scripture before your eyes. I charge you to
   remember that the words of that verse concern yourself. They are
   written for your learning, and for all who call themselves Christians.
   "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
   Churches."

   This verse is repeated seven times over in the second and third
   chapters of the book of Revelation. Seven different letters does the
   Lord Jesus there send by the hand of His servant John to the seven
   Churches of Asia. Seven times over He winds up His letter by the same
   solemn words, "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith
   unto the Churches."

   Now the Lord God is perfect in all His works. He does nothing by
   chance. He caused no part of the Scriptures to be written by chance. In
   all His dealings you may trace design, purpose and plan. There was
   design in the size and orbit of each planet. There was design in the
   shape and structure of the least fly's wing. There was design in every
   verse of the Bible. There was design in every repetition of a verse,
   wherever it took place. There was design in the sevenfold repetition of
   the verse before our eyes. It had a meaning, and we were intended to
   observe it.

   This verse appears to me to call the special attention of all true
   Christians to the seven "Epistles to the Churches." I believe it was
   meant to make believers take particular notice of the things which
   these seven Epistles contain.

   Let me try to point out certain leading truths which these seven
   Epistles seem to me to teach. They are truths for the times we live
   in--truths for the latter days--truths which we cannot know too
   well--truths which it would be good for us all to know and feel far
   better than we do.

   I. I ask my readers to observe in the first place, that the Lord Jesus,
   in all the seven Epistles, speaks of nothing but matters of doctrine,
   practice, warning, and promise.

   I ask you to look over these seven Epistles to the Churches, quietly
   and at your leisure, and you will soon see what I mean,

   You will observe that the Lord Jesus sometimes finds fault with false
   doctrines, and ungodly, inconsistent practices, and rebukes them
   sharply.

   You will observe that He sometimes praises faith, patience, work,
   labour, perseverance, and bestows on these graces high commendation.

   You will sometimes find Him enjoining repentance, amendment, return to
   the first love, renewed application to Himself--and the like.

   But I want you to observe that you will not find the Lord in any of the
   epistles dwelling upon Church government or ceremonies. He says nothing
   about sacraments or ordinances. He makes no mention of liturgies or
   forms. He does not instruct John to write one word about baptism, or
   the Lord's Supper, or the apostolical succession of ministers. In
   short, the leading principles of what may be called "the sacramental
   system" are not brought forward in any one of the seven epistles from
   first to last.

   Now why do I dwell on this?--I do it because many professing Christians
   in the present day would have us believe these things are of first, of
   cardinal, of paramount importance.

   There are not a few who seem to hold that there can be no Church
   without a bishop--and no godliness without a liturgy.--They appear to
   believe that to teach the value of the sacraments is the first work of
   a minister, and to keep to their parish church the first business of a
   people.

   Now let no man misunderstand me when I say this. Do not run away with
   the notion that I see no importance in sacraments. On the contrary, I
   regard them as great blessings to all who receive them "rightly,
   worthily, and with faith." Do not fancy that I attach no value to
   Episcopacy, a liturgy, and the parochial system. On the contrary, I
   consider that a Church well-administered, which has these three things,
   and an Evangelical ministry, is a far more complete and useful Church
   than one in which they are not to be found.

   But this I say, that sacraments, Church government, the use of a
   liturgy, the observance of ceremonies and forms, are all as nothing
   compared to faith, repentance, and holiness. And my authority for so
   saying is the whole tenor of our Lord's words to the seven Churches.

   I never can believe, if a certain form of Church government was so
   important as some say, that the great Head of the Church would have
   said nothing about it here. I should have expected to have found
   something said about it to Sardis and Laodicea. But I find nothing at
   all. And I think that silence is a great fact.

   I cannot help remarking just the same fact in Paul's parting words to
   the Ephesian elders. (Acts xx. 27-35.) He was then leaving them for
   ever. He was giving his last charge on earth, and spoke as one who
   would see the faces of his hearers no more. And yet there is not a word
   in the charge about the sacraments and Church government. If ever there
   was a time for speaking of them, it was then. But he says nothing at
   all; and I believe it was an intentional silence.

   Now here lies one reason why we, who, rightly or wrongly, are called
   Evangelical clergy, do not preach about bishops, and the Prayer-book,
   and ordinances more than we do. It is not because we do not value them
   in their place, proportion, and way. We do value them as really and
   truly as any, and are thankful for them. But we believe that repentance
   toward God, faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and a holy
   conversation, are subjects of far more importance to men's souls.
   Without these no man can be saved. These are the first and most weighty
   matters, and therefore on these we dwell.

   Here again lies one reason why we so often urge on men not to be
   content with the mere outward part of religion. You must have observed
   that we often warn you not to rest on Church membership and Church
   privileges. We tell you not to be satisfied all is right because you
   come to church on Sunday and come up to the Lord's table. We often urge
   you to remember that he is not a Christian who is one outwardly--that
   you must be "born again"--that you must have a "faith that worketh by
   love "--that there must be a "new creation" by the Spirit in your
   heart. We do it because this seems to us the mind of Christ. These are
   the kind of things He dwells upon, when writing seven times over to
   seven different Churches. We feel that if we follow Him we cannot
   greatly err.

   I am aware that men charge us with taking "low views" of the subjects
   to which I have adverted. It is a small thing that our views are
   thought "low," so long as our consciences tell us they are Scriptural.
   High ground, as it is called, is not always safe ground. What Balaam
   said must be our answer, "What the Lord saith that will I speak."
   (Numbers xxiv. 13.)

   The plain truth is, there are two distinct and separate systems of
   Christianity in England at the present day. It is useless to deny it.
   Their existence is a great fact and one that cannot be too clearly
   known.

   According to one system, religion is a mere corporate business. You are
   to belong to a certain body of people. By virtue of your membership of
   this body, vast privileges, both for time and eternity, are conferred
   upon you. It matters little what you are and what you feel. You are not
   to try yourself by your feelings. You are a member of a great
   ecclesiastical corporation. Then all its privileges and immunities are
   your own. Do you belong to the one true, visible corporation? That is
   the grand question.

   According to the other system, religion is eminently a personal
   business between yourself and Christ. It will not save your soul to be
   an outward member of any ecclesiastical body whatever, however sound
   that body may be. Such membership will not wash away one sin, or give
   you confidence in the day of judgment. There must be personal faith in
   Christ--personal dealings between yourself and God--personal felt
   communion between your own heart and the Holy Ghost. Have you this
   personal faith? Have you this felt work of the Spirit in your soul?
   This is the grand question. If not, you will be lost.

   This last system is the system which those who are called Evangelical
   ministers cleave to and teach. They do so because they are satisfied
   that it is the system of Holy Scripture. They do so because they are
   convinced that any other system is productive of most dangerous
   consequences, and calculated to delude men fatally as to their actual
   state. They do so because they believe it to be the only system of
   teaching which God will bless, and that no Church will flourish so much
   as that in which repentance, faith, conversion, and the work of the
   Spirit are the grand subjects of the minister's sermon.

   Once more I say, let us often look carefully over the seven "Epistles
   to the Churches."

   II. I ask my readers, in the second place, to observe that in every
   epistle the Lord Jesus says, I know thy works.

   That repeated expression is very striking. It is not for nothing that
   we read these words seven times over.

   To one Church the Lord Jesus says, I know thy labour and patience--to
   another, thy tribulation and poverty--to a third, thy charity, and
   service, and faith. But to all, He uses the words I now dwell on: "I
   know thy works." It is not, "I know thy profession--thy desires--thy
   resolutions--thy wishes,"--but thy works. "I know thy works."

   The works of a professing Christian are of great importance. They
   cannot save your soul. They cannot justify you. They cannot wipe out
   your sins. They cannot deliver you from the wrath of God. But it does
   not follow because they cannot save you, that they are of no
   importance. Take heed and beware of such a notion. The man who thinks
   so is fearfully deceived.

   I often think I could willingly die for the doctrine of justification
   by faith without the deeds of the law. But I must earnestly contend, as
   a general principle, that a man's works are the evidence of a man's
   religion. If you call yourself a Christian, you must show it in your
   daily ways and daily behaviour. Call to mind that the faith of Abraham
   and of Rahab was proved by their works. (James ii. 21-25.) Remember it
   avails you and me nothing to profess we know God, if in works we deny
   Him. (Titus i. 16.) Remember the words of the Lord Jesus, "Every tree
   is known by its own fruit." (Luke vi. 44.)

   But whatever the works of a professing Christian may be, Jesus says, "I
   know them!" "His eyes are in every place, beholding the evil and the
   good." (Prov. xv. 3.) You never did an action, however private, but
   Jesus saw it. You never spoke a word, no, not even in a whisper, but
   Jesus heard it. You never wrote a letter, even to your dearest friend,
   but Jesus read it. You never thought a thought, however secret, but
   Jesus was familiar with it. His eyes are as a flaming fire. The
   darkness is no darkness with Him. All things are open and manifest
   before Him. He says to every one, "I know thy works."

   (a) The Lord Jesus knows the works of all impenitent and unbelieving
   souls, and will one day punish them. They are not forgotten in heaven,
   though they may be upon earth. When the great white throne is set, and
   the books are opened, the wicked dead will be judged "according to
   their works."

   (b) The Lord Jesus knows the works of His own people, and weighs them.
   "By Him actions are weighed." (1 Sam. ii. 3.) He knows the why and the
   wherefore of the deeds of all believers. He sees their motives in every
   step they take. He discerns how much is done for His sake, and how much
   is done for the sake of praise. Alas! not a few things are done by
   believers which seem very good to you and me, but are rated very low by
   Christ.

   (c) The Lord Jesus knows the works of all His own people, and will one
   day reward them. He never overlooks a kind word or a kind deed done in
   His name. He will own the least fruit of faith, and declare it before
   the world in the day of His appearing. If you love the Lord Jesus and
   follow Him, you may be sure your work and labour shall not be in vain
   in the Lord. The works of those that die in the Lord "shall follow
   them." (Rev. xiv. 13.) They shall not go before them, nor yet by their
   side, but they shall follow them, and be owned in the day of Christ's
   appearing. The parable of the pounds shall be made good. "Every man
   shall receive his own reward, according to his own labour." (1Cor. iii.
   8.) The world knows you not, for it knows not your Master. But Jesus
   sees and knows all. "I know thy works."

   Think what a solemn warning there is here to all worldly and
   hypocritical professors of religion. Let all such read, mark, and
   digest these words. Jesus says to you, "I know thy works." You may
   deceive me or any other minister; it is easy to do so. You may receive
   the bread and wine from my hands, and yet be cleaving to iniquity in
   your hearts. You may sit under the pulpit of an Evangelical preacher,
   week after week, and hear his words with a serious face, but believe
   them not. But remember this, you cannot deceive Christ. He who
   discovered the deadness of Sardis and the lukewarmness of Laodicea,
   sees you through and through, and will expose you at the last day,
   except you repent.

   Oh! believe me, hypocrisy is a losing game. It will never answer to
   seem one thing and be another; to have the name of Christian, and not
   the reality. Be sure, if your conscience smites you and condemns you in
   this matter--be sure your sin will find you out. The eye that saw Achan
   steal the golden wedge and hide it, is upon you. The book that recorded
   the deeds of Gehazi, and Ananias, and Sapphira, is recording your ways.
   Jesus mercifully sends you a word of warning to-day. He says, "I know
   thy works." But think also what encouragement there is here for every
   honest and true-hearted believer. To you also Jesus says, "I know thy
   works." You see no beauty in any action that you do. All seems
   imperfect, blemished, and defiled. You are often sick at heart of your
   own short-comings. You often feel that your whole life is one great
   arrear, and that every day is either a blank or a blot. But know now
   that Jesus can see some beauty in everything that you do from a
   conscientious desire to please Him. His eye can discern excellence in
   the least thing which is a fruit of His own Spirit. He can pick out the
   grains of gold from amidst the dross of your performances, and sift the
   wheat from amidst the chaff, in all your doings. Your tears are all put
   into His bottle. Your endeavours to do good to others, however feeble,
   are written in His book of remembrance. The least cup of cold water
   given in His name shall not lose its reward. He does not forget your
   work and labour of love, however little the world may regard it.

   It is very wonderful; but so it is. Jesus loves to honour the work of
   His Spirit in His people, and to pass over their frailties. He dwells
   on the faith of Rahab, but not on her lie. He commends His Apostles for
   continuing with Him in His temptations, and passes over their ignorance
   and want of faith. (Luke xxii. 28.) "Like as a father pitieth his
   children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear Him." (Ps. ciii. 13.) And
   as a father finds a pleasure in the least acts of his children, of
   which a stranger knows nothing, so I suppose the Lord finds a pleasure
   in our poor feeble efforts to serve Him.

   But it is all very wonderful. I can well understand the righteous in
   the day of judgment saying, "Lord, when saw we Thee an hungered and fed
   Thee, or thirsty and gave Thee drink? When saw we Thee a stranger, and
   took Thee in? or naked, and clothed Thee? Or when saw we Thee sick or
   in prison, and came unto Thee?" (Matt. xxv. 37-39.) It may well seem
   incredible and impossible that they can have done anything worth naming
   in the great day! Yet so it is. Let all believers take the comfort of
   it. The Lord says, "I know thy works." It ought to humble you. But it
   ought not to make you afraid.

   III. I ask my readers to observe, in the third and last place, that in
   every epistle the Lord Jesus makes a promise to the man that overcomes.

   Seven times over Jesus gives to the Churches exceeding great and
   precious promises. Each is different, and each full of strong
   consolation: but each is addressed to the overcoming Christian. It is
   always "he that overcometh," or "to him that overcometh." I ask you to
   take notice of this.

   Every professing Christian is the soldier of Christ. He is bound by his
   baptism to fight Christ's battle against sin, the world, and the devil.
   The man that does not do this breaks his vow. He is a spiritual
   defaulter. He does not fulfil the engagements made for him. The man
   that does not do this is practically renouncing his Christianity. The
   very fact that he belongs to a Church, attends a Christian place of
   worship, and calls himself a Christian is a public declaration that he
   desires to be reckoned a soldier of Jesus Christ.

   Armour is provided for the professing Christian, if he will only use
   it. "Take unto you," says Paul to the Ephesians, "the whole armour of
   God." "Stand, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on
   the breastplate of righteousness." "Take the helmet of salvation, and
   the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God." "Above all, take
   the shield of faith." (Ephes. vi. 13-17.) And not least, the professing
   Christian has the best of leaders: Jesus the Captain of Salvation,
   through whom he may be more than conqueror--the best of provisions, the
   bread and water of life--and the best of pay promised to him: an
   eternal weight of glory.

   All these are ancient things. I will not be drawn off from my subject
   in order to dwell on them now.

   The one point I want to impress upon your soul just now is this, that
   the true believer is not only a soldier, but a victorious soldier.--He
   not only professes to fight on Christ's side against sin, the world,
   and the devil, but he does actually fight and overcome.

   Now this is one. grand distinguishing mark of true Christians. Other
   men, perhaps, like to be numbered in the ranks of Christ's army. Other
   men may have lazy wishes, and languid desires after the crown of glory.
   But it is the true Christian alone who does the work of a soldier. He
   alone fairly meets the enemies of his soul--really fights with them,
   and in that fight overcomes them.

   One great lesson I want men to learn from these seven epistles is this,
   that if you would prove you are born again and going to heaven, you
   must be a victorious soldier of Christ. If you would make it clear that
   you have any title to Christ's precious promises, you must fight the
   good fight in Christ's cause, and in that fight you must conquer.

   Victory is the only satisfactory evidence that you have a saving
   religion. You like good sermons perhaps. You respect the Bible, and
   read it occasionally. You say your prayers night and morning. You have
   family prayers, and give to Religious Societies. I thank God for this.
   It is an very good. But how goes the battle? How does the great
   conflict go on all this time? Are you overcoming the love of the world
   and the fear of man? Are you overcoming the passions, tempers, and
   lusts of your own heart? Are you resisting the devil and making him
   flee from you? How is it in this matter? You must either rule or serve
   sin, and the devil, and the world. There is no middle course. You must
   either conquer or be lost.

   I know well it is a hard battle that you have to fight, and I want you
   to know it too. You must fight the good fight of faith, and endure
   hardships, if you would lay hold of eternal life. You must make up your
   mind to a daily struggle, if you would reach heaven. There may be short
   roads to heaven invented by man; but ancient Christianity, the good old
   way, is the way of the cross--the way of conflict. Sin, the world, and
   the devil must be actually mortified, resisted, and overcome.

   This is the road that saints of old have trodden in, and left their
   record on high.

   (a) When Moses refused the pleasures of sin in Egypt, and chose
   affliction with the people of God--this was overcoming: he overcame the
   love of pleasure.

   (b) When Micaiah refused to prophesy smooth things to king Ahab, though
   he knew he would be persecuted if he spoke the truth--this was
   overcoming: he overcame the love of ease.

   (c) When Daniel refused to give up praying, though he knew the den of
   lions was prepared for him--this was overcoming: he overcame the fear
   of death.

   (d) When Matthew rose from the receipt of custom at our Lord's bidding,
   left all and followed Him--this was overcoming: he overcame the love of
   money.

   (e) When Peter and John stood up boldly before the council and said,
   "We cannot but speak the things we have seen and heard"--this was
   overcoming: they overcame the fear of man.

   (f) When Saul the Pharisee gave up all his prospects of preferment
   among the Jews, and preached that very Jesus whom he had once
   persecuted--this was overcoming: he overcame the love of man's praise.

   The same kind of thing which these men did you must also do if you
   would be saved. They were men of like passions with yourself, and yet
   they overcame. They had as many trials as you can possibly have, and
   yet they overcame. They fought. They wrestled. They struggled. You must
   do the same.

   What was the secret of their victory?--their faith. They believed on
   Jesus, and believing were made strong. They believed on Jesus, and
   believing were held up. In all their battles, they kept their eyes on
   Jesus, and He never left them nor forsook them. "They overcame by the
   blood of the Lamb, and the word of their testimony," and so may you.
   (Rev. xii. 11.)

   I set these words before you. I ask you to lay them to heart. Resolve,
   by the grace of God, to be an overcoming Christian.

   I fear much for many professing Christians. I see no sign of fighting
   in them, much less of victory. They never strike one stroke on the side
   of Christ. They are at peace with His enemies. They have no quarrel
   with sin.--I warn you, this is not Christianity. This is not the way to
   heaven.

   I often fear much for those who hear the Gospel regularly, i fear lest
   you become so familiar with the sound of its doctrines, that insensibly
   you become dead to its power. I fear lest your religion should sink
   down into a little vague talk about your own weakness and corruption,
   and a few sentimental expressions about Christ, while real, practical
   fighting on Christ's side is altogether neglected. Oh! beware of this
   state of mind. "Be doers of the word, and not hearers only." No
   victory--no crown! Fight and overcome! (James i. 22.)

   Young men and women, and specially those who have been brought up in
   religious families, I fear much for you. I fear lest you get a habit of
   giving way to every temptation. I fear lest you become afraid of
   saying, "No!" to the world and the devil--and, when sinners entice you,
   think it least trouble to consent. Beware, I do beseech you, of giving
   way. Every concession will make you weaker. Go into the world resolved
   to fight Christ's battle--and fight your way on.

   Believers in the Lord Jesus, of every Church and rank in life, I feel
   much for you. I know your course is hard. I know it is a sore battle
   you have to fight. I know you are often tempted to say, "It is of no
   use," and to lay down your arms altogether.

   Cheer up, dear brethren and sisters. Take comfort, I entreat you. Look
   at the bright side of your position. Be encouraged to fight on. The
   time is short. The Lord is at hand. The night is far spent. Millions as
   weak as you have fought the same fight. Not one of all those millions
   has been finally led captive by Satan. Mighty are your enemies--but the
   Captain of your salvation is mightier still.--His arm, His grace, and
   His Spirit shall hold you up. Cheer up. Be not cast down.

   What though you lose a battle or two? You shall not lose all. What
   though you faint sometimes? You shall not be quite cast down. What
   though you fall seven times? You shall not be destroyed. Watch against
   sin, and sin shall not have dominion over you. Resist the devil, and he
   shall flee from you. Come out boldly from the world, and the world
   shall be obliged to let you go. You shall find yourselves in the end
   more than conquerors--you shall "overcome."

   Let me draw from the whole subject a few words of application, and then
   I have done.

   (1) For one thing, let me warn all who are living only for the world,
   to take heed what they are doing. You are enemies to Christ, though you
   may not know it. He marks your ways, though you turn your backs on Him,
   and refuse to give Him your hearts. He is observing your daily life,
   and reading your daily ways. There will yet be a resurrection of all
   your thoughts, words and actions. You may forget them, but God does
   not. You may be careless about them, but they are carefully marked down
   in the book of remembrance. Oh! worldly man, think of this! Tremble,
   tremble and repent.

   (2) For another thing, let me warn all formalists and self-righteous
   people to take heed that they are not deceived. You fancy you will go
   to heaven because you go regularly to church. You indulge an
   expectation of eternal life, because you are always at the Lord's
   table, and are never missing in your pew. But where is your repentance?
   Where is your faith? Where are your evidences of a new heart? Where is
   the work of the Spirit? Where are your evidences of regeneration? Oh,
   formal Christian, consider these questions! Tremble, tremble and
   repent.

   (3) For another thing, let me warn all careless members of Churches to
   beware lest they trifle their souls into hell. You live on year after
   year as if there was no battle to be fought with sin, the world, and
   the devil. You pass through life a smiling, laughing, gentlemanlike or
   lady-like person, and behave as if there was no devil, no heaven, and
   no hell. Oh, careless Churchman, or careless Dissenter, careless
   Episcopalian, careless Presbyterian, careless Independent, careless
   Baptist, awake to see eternal realities in their true light! Awake and
   put on the armour of God! Awake and fight hard for life! Tremble,
   tremble and repent.

   (4) For another thing, let me warn every one who wants to be saved, not
   to be content with the world's standard of religion. Surely, no man
   with his eyes open can fail to see that the Christianity of the New
   Testament is something far higher and deeper than the Christianity of
   most professing Christians. The formal, easy-going, do-little thing
   which most people call religion, is evidently not the religion of the
   Lord Jesus. The things that He praises in these seven Epistles are not
   praised by the world. The things that He blames are not things in which
   the world sees any harm. Oh, if you would follow Christ, be not content
   with the world's Christianity! Tremble, tremble and repent.

   (5) In the last place, let me warn every one who professes to be a
   believer in the Lord Jesus, not to be content with a little religion.

   Of all sights in the Church of Christ, I know none more painful to my
   own eyes than a Christian contented and satisfied with a little grace,
   a little repentance, a little faith, a little knowledge, a little
   charity, and a little holiness. I do beseech and entreat every
   believing soul that reads this tract not to be that kind of man. If you
   have any desires after usefulness--if you have any wishes to promote
   your Lord's glory--if you have any longings after much inward peace--be
   not content with a little religion.

   Let us rather seek, every year we live, to make more spiritual progress
   than we have done--to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord
   Jesus--to grow in humility and self-acquaintance--to grow in
   spirituality and heavenly-mindedness--to grow in conformity to the
   image of our Lord.

   Let us beware of leaving our first love like Ephesus--of becoming
   lukewarm like Laodicea--of tolerating false practices like Pergamos--of
   tampering with false doctrine like Thyatira--of becoming half dead,
   ready to die, like Sardis.

   Let us rather covet the best gifts. Let us aim at eminent holiness. Let
   us endeavour to be like Smyrna and Philadelphia. Let us hold fast what
   we have already, and continually seek to have more. Let us labour to be
   unmistakable Christians. Let it not be our distinctive character that
   we are men of science--or men of literary attainments--or men of the
   world--or men of pleasure, or men of business--but "men of God." Let us
   so live that all may see that to us the things of God are the first
   things, and the glory of God the first aim in our lives--to follow
   Christ our grand object in time present--to be with Christ our grand
   desire in time to come.

   Let us live in this way, and we shall be happy. Let us live in this
   way, and we shall do good to the world. Let us live in this way, and we
   shall leave good evidence behind us when we are buried. Let us live in
   this way, and the Spirit's word to the Churches will not have been
   spoken to us in vain.
     __________________________________________________________________

XV.
"LOVEST THOU ME?"

   "Lovest thou Me?"--John xxi. 16.

   THE question which heads this paper was addressed by Christ to the
   Apostle Peter. A more important question could not be asked. Nineteen
   hundred years have passed away since the words were spoken. But to this
   very day the inquiry is most searching and useful.

   A disposition to love somebody is one of the commonest feelings which
   God has implanted in human nature. Too often, unhappily, people set
   their affection on unworthy objects. I want this day to claim a place
   for Him who alone is worthy of all our hearts' best feelings. I want
   men to give some of their love to that Divine Person who loved us, and
   gave Himself for us. In all their loving, I would have them not forget
   TO LOVE CHRIST.

   Suffer me to press this mighty subject upon the attention of every
   reader of this paper. This is no matter for mere enthusiasts and
   fanatics. It deserves the consideration of every reasonable Christian
   who believes the Bible. Our very salvation is bound up with it. Life or
   death, heaven or hell, depend on our ability to answer the simple
   question "Do you love Christ? "

   There are two points which I wish to bring forward in opening up this
   subject.

   I. In the first place, let me show the peculiar feeling of a true
   Christian towards Christ--he loves Him.

   A true Christian is not a mere baptized man or woman. He is something
   more. He is not a person who only goes, as a matter of form, to a
   church or chapel on Sundays and lives all the rest of the week as if
   there was no God. Formality is not Christianity. Ignorant lip-worship
   is not true religion. The Scripture speaketh expressly: "They are not
   all Israel which are of Israel." (Rom. ix. 6.) The practical lesson of
   those words is clear and plain. All are not true Christians who are
   members of the visible Church of Christ.

   The true Christian is one whose religion is in his heart and life. It
   is felt by himself in his heart. It is seen by others in his conduct
   and life. He feels his sinfulness, guilt and badness, and repents. He
   sees Jesus Christ to be that Divine Saviour whom his soul needs, and
   commits himself to Him. He puts off the old man with his corrupt and
   carnal habits and puts on the new man. He lives a new and holy life,
   fighting habitually against the world, the flesh and the devil. Christ
   Himself is the corner-stone of his Christianity. Ask him in what he
   trusts for the forgiveness of his many sins, and he will tell you in
   the death of Christ.--Ask him in what righteousness he hopes to stand
   innocent at the judgment day, and he will tell you it is the
   righteousness of Christ.--Ask him by what pattern he tries to frame his
   life, and he will tell you that it is the example of Christ.

   But, beside all this, there is one thing in a true Christian which is
   eminently peculiar to him. That thing is love to Christ. Knowledge,
   faith, hope, reverence, obedience, are all marked features in a true
   Christian's character. But his picture would be very imperfect if you
   omitted his "love" to his Divine Master. He not only knows, trusts, and
   obeys. He goes further than this--he loves.

   This peculiar mark of a true Christian is one which we find mentioned
   several times in the Bible. "Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ" is an
   expression which many Christians are familiar with. Let it never be
   forgotten that love is mentioned by the Holy Ghost in almost as strong
   terms as faith. Great as the danger is of him "that believeth not," the
   danger of him that "loveth not" is equally great. Not believing and not
   loving are both steps to everlasting ruin.

   Hear what St. Paul says to the Corinthians: "If any man love not the
   Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran-atha." (1 Cor. 22.) St.
   Paul allows no way of escape to the man who does not love Christ. He
   leaves him no loophole or excuse. A man may lack clear head-knowledge
   and yet be saved. He may fail in courage and be overcome by the fear of
   man, like Peter. He may fall tremendously, like David, and yet rise
   again. But if a man does not love Christ he is not in the way of life.
   The curse is yet upon him. He is on the broad road that leadeth to
   destruction.

   Hear what St. Paul says to the Ephesians, "Grace be with all them that
   love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity." (Eph. vi. 24.) The Apostle is
   here sending his good wishes, and declaring his good will to all true
   Christians. Many of them, no doubt, he had never seen. Many of them in
   the early Churches, we may be very sure, were weak in faith, and
   knowledge, and self-denial. How, then, shall he describe them in
   sending his message? What words can he use which will not discourage
   the weaker brethren? He chooses a sweeping expression which exactly
   describes all true Christians under one common name. All had not
   attained to the same degree, whether in doctrine or practice. But all
   loved Christ in sincerity.

   Hear what our Lord Jesus Christ Himself says to the Jews, "If God were
   your Father, ye would love Me." (John viii. 42.) He saw His misguided
   enemies satisfied with their spiritual condition, on the one single
   ground that they were children of Abraham. He saw them, like many
   ignorant Christians of our own day, claiming to be God's children for
   no better reasons than this: that they were circumcised and belonged to
   the Jewish Church. He lays down the broad principle that no man is a
   child of God who does not love God's only begotten Son. No man has a
   right to call God "Father" who does not love Christ. Well would it be
   for many Christians if they were to remember that this mighty principle
   applies to them as well as to the Jews. No love to Christ--then no
   sonship to God I

   Hear once more what our Lord Jesus Christ said to the Apostle Peter
   after He rose from the dead. Three times He asked him the question,
   "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me." (John xxi. 15-17.) The occasion
   was remarkable. He meant gently to remind His erring disciple of His
   thrice-repeated fall. He desired to call forth from him a new
   confession of faith before publicly restoring to him his commission to
   feed the Church. And what was the question that He asked him? He might
   have said:--"Believest thou? Art thou converted? Are thou ready to
   confess Me? Wilt thou obey Me?" He uses none of these expressions. He
   simply says, "lovest thou Me?" This is the point, He would have us
   know, on which a man's Christianity hinges. Simple as the question
   sounded, it was most searching. Plain and easy to be understood by the
   most unlearned poor man, it contains matter which tests the reality of
   the most advanced apostle. If a man truly loves Christ, all is
   right--if not, all is wrong.

   Would you know the secret of this peculiar feeling towards Christ which
   distinguishes the true Christian? You have it in the words of St. John,
   "We love Him because He first loved us." (1 John iv. 19.) That text, no
   doubt, applies specially to God the Father. But it is no less true of
   God the Son.

   A true Christian loves Christ for all He has done for him. He has
   suffered in his stead, and died for him on the cross. He has redeemed
   him from the guilt, the power, and the consequences of sin, by His
   blood. He has called him by His Spirit to self-knowledge, repentance,
   faith, hope, and holiness. He has forgiven all his many sins and
   blotted them out. He has freed him from the captivity of the world, the
   flesh, and the devil. He has taken him from the brink of hell, placed
   him in the narrow way, and set his face toward heaven. He has given him
   light instead of darkness, peace of conscience instead of uneasiness,
   hope instead of uncertainty, life instead of death. Can you wonder that
   the true Christian loves Christ?

   And he loves Him besides, for all that He is still doing. He feels that
   He is daily washing away his many shortcomings and infirmities, and
   pleading his soul's cause before God. He is daily supplying all the
   needs of his soul, and providing him with an hourly provision of mercy
   and grace. He is daily leading him by His Spirit to a city of
   habitation, bearing with him when he is weak and ignorant, raising him
   up when he stumbles and falls, protecting him against his many enemies,
   preparing an eternal home for him in heaven. Can you wonder that the
   true Christian loves Christ?

   Does the debtor in jail love the friend who unexpectedly and
   undeservedly pays all his debts, supplies him with fresh capital, and
   takes him into partnership with himself? Does the prisoner in war love
   the man who at the risk of his own life breaks through the enemy's
   lines, rescues him, and sets him free? Does the drowning sailor love
   the man who plunges into the sea, dives after him, catches him by the
   hair of his head, and by a mighty effort saves him from a watery grave?
   A very child can answer such questions as these. Just in the same way,
   and upon the same principles, a true Christian loves Jesus Christ.

   (a) This love to Christ is the inseparable companion of saving faith. A
   faith of devils, a mere intellectual faith, a man may have without
   love, but not that faith which saves. Love cannot usurp the office of
   faith. It cannot justify. It does not join the soul to Christ. It
   cannot bring peace to the conscience. But where there is real
   justifying faith in Christ, there will always be heart-love to Christ.
   He that is really forgiven is the man who will really love. (Luke vii.
   47.) If a man has no love to Christ, you may be sure he has no faith.

   (b) Love to Christ is the mainspring of work for Christ. There is
   little done for His cause on earth from sense of duty, or from
   knowledge of what is right and proper. The heart must be interested
   before the hands will move and continue moving. Excitement may
   galvanize the Christian's hands into a fitful and spasmodic activity.
   But there will be no patient continuance in well-doing, no unwearied
   labour in missionary work at home or abroad, without love. The nurse in
   a hospital may do her duty properly and well, may give the sick man his
   medicine at the right time, may feed him, minister to him, and attend
   to all his wants. But there is a vast difference between that nurse and
   a wife tending the sick-bed of a beloved husband, or a mother watching
   over a dying child. The one acts from a sense of duty--the other from
   affection and love. The one does her duty because she is paid for
   it--the other is what she is because of her heart. It is just the same
   in the matter of the service of Christ. The great workers of the
   Church--the men who have led forlorn hopes in the mission-field and
   turned the world upside down, have all been eminently lovers of Christ.

   Examine the characters of Owen and Baxter, of Rutherford and George
   Herbert, of Leighton and Hervey, of Whitfield and Wesley, of Henry
   Martyn and Judson, of Bickersteth and Simeon, of Hewitson and M'Cheyne,
   of Stowell and M'Neile. These men have left a mark on the world. And
   what was the common feature of their characters? They all loved Christ.
   They not only held a creed. They loved a Person, even the Lord Jesus
   Christ.

   (c) Love to Christ is the point which we ought specially to dwell upon
   in teaching religion to children. Election, imputed righteousness,
   original sin, justification, sanctification, and even faith itself, are
   matters which sometimes puzzle a child of tender years. But love to
   Jesus seems far more within reach of their understanding. That He loved
   them even to His death, and that they ought to love Him in return, is a
   creed which meets the span of their minds. How true it is that "out of
   the mouths of babes and sucklings Thou hast perfected praise!" (Matt.
   xxi. 16.) There are myriads of Christians who know every article of the
   Athanasian, Nicene, and Apostolic Creeds, and yet know less of real
   Christianity than a little child who only knows that he loves Christ.

   (d) Love to Christ is the common meeting-point of believers of every
   branch of Christ's Church on earth. Whether Episcopalian or
   Presbyterian, Baptist or Independent, Calvinist or Arminian, Methodist
   or Moravian, Lutheran or Reformed, Established or Free--here, at least,
   they are agreed. About forms and ceremonies, about Church government
   and modes of worship, they often differ widely. But on one point, at
   any rate, they are united. They have all one common feeling towards Him
   on whom they build their hope of salvation. They "love the Lord Jesus
   Christ in sincerity." (Ephes. vi. 24.) Many of them, perhaps, are
   ignorant of systematic divinity and could argue but feebly in defence
   of their creed. But they all know what they feel toward Him who died
   for their sins.--"I cannot speak much for Christ, sir," said an old,
   uneducated Christian woman to Dr. Chalmers; "but if I cannot speak for
   Him, I could die for Him!"

   (e) Love to Christ will be the distinguishing mark of all saved souls
   in heaven. The multitude which no man can number will all be of one
   mind. Old differences will be merged in one common feeling. Old
   doctrinal peculiarities, fiercely wrangled for upon earth, will be
   covered over by one common sense of debt to Christ. Luther and Zwingle
   will no longer dispute. Wesley and Toplady will no longer waste time in
   controversy. Churchmen and Dissenters will no longer bite and devour
   one another. All will find themselves joining with one heart and voice
   in that hymn of praise, "Unto Him that loved us, and washed us from our
   sin in His own blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and
   his Father; to Him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen."
   (Rev. i. 5-6.)

   The words which John Bunyan puts in the mouth of Mr. Standfast as he
   stood in the river of death are very beautiful. He said, "This river
   has been a terror to many; yea, the thoughts of it also have often
   frightened me. But now methinks I stand easy: my foot is fixed upon
   that on which the priests that bear the ark stood while Israel went
   over Jordan. The waters indeed are to the palate bitter, and to the
   stomach cold; yet the thoughts of what I am going to, and of the convoy
   that waits for me on the other side, lie as a glowing coal at my heart.
   I see myself now at the end of my journey; my toilsome days are ended.
   I am going to see that Head which was crowned with thorns, and that
   Face which was spit upon for me. I have formerly lived by hearing and
   faith, but now I go where I shall live by sight, and be with Him in
   whose company I delight myself. I have loved to hear my Lord spoken of;
   and wherever I have seen the print of His shoe in the earth, there I
   have coveted to set my foot too. His name has been to me a civet-box;
   yea, sweeter than all perfumes! His voice to me has been most sweet;
   and His countenance I have more desired than they that have desired the
   light of the sun!" Happy are they that know something of this
   experience! He that would be in tune for heaven must know something of
   love to Christ. He that dies ignorant of that love had better never
   have been born.

   II. Let me show, in the second place, the peculiar marks by which love
   to Christ makes itself known.

   The point is one of vast importance. If there is no salvation without
   love to Christ--if he that does not love Christ is in peril of eternal
   condemnation, it becomes us all to find out very distinctly what we
   know about this matter. Christ is in heaven, and we are upon earth. In
   what way shall the man be discerned that loves Him?

   Happily the point is one which it is not very hard to settle. How do we
   know whether we love any person here upon earth? In what way and manner
   does love show itself between people in this world--between husband and
   wife--between parent and child--between brother and sister--between
   friend and friend? Let these questions be answered by common sense and
   observations, and I ask no more. Let these questions be honestly
   answered, and the knot before us is untied. How does affection show
   itself among ourselves?

   (a) If we love a person, we like to think about him. We do not need to
   be reminded of him. We do not forget his name, or his appearance, or
   his character, or his opinions, or his tastes, or his position, or his
   occupation. He comes up before our mind's eye many a time in the day.
   Though perhaps far distant, he is often present in our thoughts. Well,
   it is just so between the true Christian and Christ! Christ "dwells in
   his heart," and is thought of more or less every day. (Ephes. iii. 17.)
   The true Christian does not need to be reminded that he has a crucified
   Master. He often thinks of Him. He never forgets that He has a day, a
   cause, and a people, and that of His people he is one. Affection is the
   real secret of a good memory in religion. No worldly man can think much
   about Christ, unless Christ is pressed upon his notice, because he has
   no affection for Him. The true Christian has thoughts about Christ
   every day that he lives, for this one simple reason, that he loves Him.

   (b) If we love a person, we like to bear about him. We find a pleasure
   in listening to those who speak of him. We feel an interest in any
   report which others make of him. We are all attention when others talk
   about him and describe his ways, his sayings, his doings, and his
   plans. Some may hear him mentioned with utter indifference, but our own
   hearts bound within us at the very sound of his name. Well, it is just
   so between the true Christian and Christ! The true Christian delights
   to hear something about his Master. He likes those sermons best which
   are full of Christ. He enjoys that society most in which people talk of
   the things which are Christ's. I have read of an old Welsh believer who
   used to walk several miles every Sunday to hear an English clergyman
   preach, though she did not understand a word of English. She was asked
   why she did so. She replied that this clergyman named the name of
   Christ so often in his sermons that it did her good. She loved even the
   name of her Saviour.

   (c) If we love a person, we like to read about him. What intense
   pleasure a letter from an absent husband gives to a wife, or a letter
   from an absent son to his mother. Others may see little worth notice in
   the letter. They can scarcely take the trouble to read it through. But
   those who love the writer see something in the letter which no one else
   can. They carry it about with them as a treasure. They read it over and
   over again. Well, it is just so between the true Christian and Christ!
   The true Christian delights to read the Scriptures, because they tell
   him about his beloved Saviour. It is no wearisome task with him to read
   them. He rarely needs remind ing to take his Bible with him when he
   goes a journey. He cannot be happy without it. And why is all this? It
   is because the Scriptures testify of Him whom his soul loves, even
   Christ.

   (d) If we love a person, we like to please him. We are glad to consult
   his tastes and opinions, to act upon his advice, and do the things
   which he approves. We even deny ourselves to meet his wishes, abstain
   from things which we know he dislikes, and learn things to do which we
   are not naturally inclined, because we think it will give him pleasure.
   Well, it is just so between the true Christian and Christ! The true
   Christian studies to please Him, by being holy both in body and spirit.
   Show him anything in his daily practice that Christ hates, and he will
   give it up. Show him anything that Christ delights in, and he will
   follow after it. He does not murmur at Christ's requirements as being
   too strict and severe, as the children of the world do. To him Christ's
   commandments are not grievous and Christ's burden is light. And why is
   all this? Simply because he loves Him.

   (e) If we love a person, we like his friends. We are favourably
   inclined to them, even before we know them. We are drawn to them by the
   common tie of common love to one and the same person. When we meet them
   we do not feel that we are altogether strangers. There is a bond of
   union between us. They love the person that we love, and that alone is
   an introduction. Well, it is just so between the true Christian and
   Christ! The true Christian regards all Christ's friends as his friends,
   members of the same body, children of the same family, soldiers in the
   same army, travellers to the same home. When he meets them, he feels as
   if he had long known them. He is more at home with them in a few
   minutes than he is with many worldly people after an acquaintance of
   several years. And what is the secret of all this? It is simply
   affection to the same Saviour, and love to the same Lord.

   (f) If we love a person, we are jealous about his name and honour. We
   do not like to hear him spoken against without speaking up for him and
   defending him. We feel bound to maintain his interests and his
   reputation. We regard the person who treats him ill with almost as much
   disfavour as if he had ill-treated us. Well, it is just so between the
   true Christian and Christ. The true Christian regards with a godly
   jealousy all efforts to disparage his Master's word, or name, or
   Church, or day. He will confess Him before princes, if need be, and be
   sensitive of the least dishonour put upon Him. He will not hold his
   peace and suffer his Master's cause to be put to shame without
   testifying against it. And why Is all this? Simply because he loves
   Him.

   (g) If we love a person, we like to talk to him. We tell him all our
   thoughts, and pour out all our heart to him. We find no difficulty in
   discovering subjects of conversation. However silent and reserved we
   may be to others, we find it easy to talk to a much-loved friend.
   However often we may meet, we are never at a loss for matter to talk
   about. We have always much to say, much to ask about, much to describe,
   much to communicate. Well, it is just so between the true Christian and
   Christ! The true Christian finds no difficulty in speaking to his
   Saviour. Every day he has something to tell Him, and he is not happy
   unless he tells it. He speaks to Him in prayer every morning and night.
   He tells Him his wants and desires, his feelings and his fears. He asks
   counsel of Him in difficulty. He asks comfort of Him in trouble. He
   cannot help it. He must converse with his Saviour continually, or he
   would faint by the way. And why is this? Simply because he loves Him.

   (h) Finally, if we love a person, we like to be always with him.
   Thinking, and hearing, and reading, and occasionally talking are all
   well in their way. But when we really love people we want something
   more. We long to be always in their company. We wish to be continually
   in their society, and to hold communion with them without interruption
   or farewell. Well, it is just so between the true Christian and Christ.
   The heart of a true Christian longs for that blessed day when he will
   see his Master face to face, and go out no more. He longs to have done
   with sinning and repenting, and believing, and to begin that endless
   life when he shall see as he has been seen, and sin no more. He has
   found it sweet to live by faith, and he feels it will be sweeter still
   to live by sight. He has found it pleasant to hear of Christ, and talk
   of Christ, and read of Christ. How much more pleasant will it be to see
   Christ with his own eyes, and never to leave Him any more! "Better," he
   feels, "is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desires"
   (Eccles. vi. 9.) And why is all this? Simply because he loves Him.

   Such are the marks by which true love may be discovered. They are all
   plain, simple, and easy to be understood. There is nothing dark,
   abstruse, and mysterious about them. Use them honestly, and handle them
   fairly, and you cannot fail to get some light on the subject of this
   paper.

   Perhaps you had a beloved son in the army at the time of a great war.
   Perhaps he was actively engaged in that war, and in the very midst of
   the struggle. Cannot you remember how strong, and deep, and anxious
   your feelings were about that son?--That was love!

   Perhaps you have known what it is to have a beloved husband in the
   navy, often called from home by duty, often separated from you for many
   months and even years. Cannot you recollect your sorrowful feelings at
   that time of separation?--That was love!

   Perhaps you have at this moment a beloved brother in London, launched
   for the first time amidst the temptations of a great city, in order to
   make his way in business. How will he turn out? How will he get on?
   Will you ever see him again? Do you not know that you often think about
   that brother?--That is affection!

   Perhaps you are engaged to be married to a person every way suited to
   you. But prudence makes it necessary to defer the marriage to a distant
   period, and duty makes it necessary to be at a distance from the one
   you have promised to make your wife. Must you not confess that she is
   often in your thoughts?--Must you not confess that you like to hear of
   her, and hear from her, and that you long to see her?--That is
   affection!

   I speak of things that are familiar to everyone. I need not dwell upon
   them any further. They are as old as the hills. They are understood all
   over the world. There is hardly a branch of Adam's family that does not
   know something of affection and love. Then let it never be said that we
   cannot find out whether a Christian really loves Christ. It can be
   known; it may be discovered; the proofs are all ready to your hand. You
   have heard them this very day. Love to the Lord Jesus Christ is no
   hidden, secret, impalpable thing. It is like the light--it will be
   seen. It is like sound--it will be heard. It is like heat--it will be
   felt. Where it exists it cannot be hid. Where it cannot be seen you may
   be sure there is none.

   It is time for me to draw this paper to a conclusion. But I cannot end
   without an effort to press its subject home to the individual
   conscience of each into whose hands it has fallen. I do it in all love
   and affection. My heart's desire and prayer to God, in writing this
   paper, is to do good to souls.

   1. Let me ask you, for one thing, to look the question in the face
   which Christ asked of Peter, and try to answer it for yourself. Look at
   it seriously. Examine it carefully. Weigh it well. After reading all
   that I have said about it, can you honestly say that you love Christ?

   It is no answer to tell me that you believe the truth of Christianity,
   and hold the articles of the Christian faith. Such religion as this
   will never save your soul. The devils believe in a certain way, and
   tremble. (James ii. 19.) True, saving Christianity is not the mere
   believing a certain set of opinions, and holding a certain set of
   notions. Its essence is knowing, trusting, and loving a certain living
   Person who died for us--even Christ the Lord. The early Christians,
   like Phoebe, and Persis, and Tryphena, and Tryphosa, and Gaius, and
   Philemon, knew little, probably, of dogmatic theology. But they all had
   this grand leading feature in their religion, they loved Christ.

   It is no answer to tell me that you disapprove of a religion of
   feelings. If you mean by that that you dislike a religion consisting of
   nothing but feelings, I agree with you entirely. But if you mean to
   shut out feelings altogether, you can know little of Christianity. The
   Bible teaches us plainly that a man may have good feelings without any
   true religion. But it teaches us no less plainly that there can be no
   true religion without some feeling towards Christ.

   It is vain to conceal that if you do not love Christ, your soul is in
   great danger. You can have no saving faith now while you live. You are
   unfit for heaven if you die. He that lives without love to Christ can
   be sensible of no obligation to Him. He that dies without love to
   Christ could never be happy in that heaven where Christ is all, and in
   all. Awake to know the peril of your position. Open your eyes. Consider
   your ways, and be wise. I can only warn you as a friend. But I do it
   with all my heart and soul. May God grant that this warning may not be
   in vain!

   2. In the next place, if you do not love Christ, let me tell you
   plainly what is the reason. You have no sense of debt to Him. You have
   no feeling of obligation to Him. You have no abiding recollection of
   having got anything from Him. This being the case it is not likely, it
   is not probable, it is not reasonable that you should love Him.

   There is but one remedy for this state of things. That remedy is
   self-knowledge, and the teaching of the Holy Ghost. The eyes of your
   understanding must be opened. You must find out what you are by nature.
   You must discover that grand secret, your guilt and emptiness in God's
   sight.

   Perhaps you never read your Bible at all, or only read an occasional
   chapter as a mere matter of form, without interest, understanding, or
   self-application. Take my advice this day, and change your plan. Begin
   to read the Bible like a man in earnest, and never rest till you become
   familiar with it. Read what the law of God requires, as expounded by
   the Lord Jesus in the fifth of St. Matthew. Read how St. Paul describes
   human nature in the first two chapters of his Epistle to the Romans.
   Study such passages as these with prayer for the Spirit's teaching, and
   then say whether you are not a debtor to God and a debtor in mighty
   need of a Friend like Christ.

   Perhaps you are one who has never known anything of real, hearty,
   business-like prayer. You have been used to regard religion as an
   affair of churches, chapels, forms, services, and Sundays, but not as a
   thing requiring the serious, heartfelt attention of the inward man.
   Take my advice this day and change your plan. Begin the habit of real,
   earnest pleading with God about your soul. Ask Him for light, teaching,
   and self-knowledge. Beseech Him to show you anything you need to know
   for the saving of your soul. Do this with all your heart and mind, and
   I have no doubt that before long you will feel your need of Christ.

   The advice I offer may seem simple and old-fashioned. Do not despise it
   on that account. It is the good old way in which millions have walked
   already and found peace to their souls. Not to love Christ is to be in
   imminent danger of eternal ruin. To see your need of Christ and your
   amazing debt to Christ is the first step towards loving Him. To know
   yourself and find out your real condition before God is the only way to
   see your need. To search God's Book and ask God for light in prayer is
   the right course by which to attain saving knowledge. Do not be above
   taking the advice I offer. Take it and be saved.

   (3) In the last place, if you really know anything of love towards
   Christ, accept two parting words of comfort and counsel. The Lord grant
   they may do you good.

   For one thing, if you love Christ in deed and truth, rejoice in the
   thought that you have good evidence about the state of your soul. Love,
   I tell you this day, is an evidence of grace.

   What though you are sometimes perplexed with doubts and fears? What
   though you find it hard to say whether your faith is genuine and your
   grace real? What though your eyes are often so dimmed with tears that
   you cannot clearly see your calling and election of God? Still there is
   ground for hope and strong consolation if your heart can testify that
   you love Christ. Where there is true love, there is faith and grace.
   You would not love Him if He had not done something for you. Your very
   love is a token for good.

   For another thing, if you love Christ, never be ashamed to let others
   see it and know it. Speak for Him. Witness for Him. Live for Him. Work
   for Him. If He has loved you and washed you from your sins in His own
   blood, you never need shrink from letting others know that you feel it,
   and love Him in return.

   "Man," said a thoughtless, ungodly English traveller to a North
   American Indian convert, "Man, what is the reason that you make so much
   of Christ, and talk so much about Him? What has this Christ done for
   you, that you should make so much ado about Him?"

   The converted Indian did not answer him in words. He gathered together
   some dry leaves and moss and made a ring with them on the ground. He
   picked up a live worm and put it in the middle of the ring. He struck a
   light and set the moss and leaves on fire. The flame soon rose and the
   heat scorched the worm. It writhed in agony, and after trying in vain
   to escape on every side, curled itself up in the middle, as if about to
   die in despair. At that moment the Indian reached forth his hand, took
   up the worm gently and placed it on his bosom. "Stranger," he said to
   the Englishman, "Do you see that worm? I was that perishing creature. I
   was dying in my sins, hopeless, helpless, and on the brink of eternal
   fire. It was Jesus Christ who put forth the arm of His power. It was
   Jesus Christ who delivered me with the hand of His grace, and plucked
   me from everlasting burnings. It was Jesus Christ who placed me, a poor
   sinful worm, near the heart of His love. Stranger, that is the reason
   why I talk of Jesus Christ and make much of Him. I am not ashamed of
   it, because I love Him."

   If we know anything of love to Christ, may we have the mind of this
   North American Indian! May we never think that we can love Christ too
   well, live to Him too thoroughly, confess Him too boldly, lay ourselves
   out for Him too heartily! Of all the things that will surprise us in
   the resurrection morning, this, I believe, will surprise us most: that
   we did not love Christ more before we died.
     __________________________________________________________________

XVI.
WITHOUT CHRIST

   "Ye were without Christ."--Ephes. ii. 12.

   THE text which heads this paper describes the state of the Ephesians
   before they became Christians. But that is not all. It describes the
   state of every man and woman in England who is not converted to God. A
   more miserable state cannot be conceived! It is bad enough to be
   without money, or without health, or without home, or without friends.
   But it is far worse to be "without Christ."

   Let us examine the text this day, and see what it contains. Who can
   tell but it may prove a message from God to some reader of this paper?

   1. Let us consider, in the first place, when it can be said of a man
   that he is "without Christ."

   The expression "without Christ," be it remembered, is not one of my own
   invention. The words were not first coined by me, but were written
   under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. They were used by St. Paul
   when he was reminding the Ephesian Christians what their former
   condition was, before they heard the Gospel and believed. Ignorant and
   dark no doubt they had been, buried in idolatry and heathenism,
   worshippers of the false goddess Diana. But all this he passes over
   completely. He seems to think that this would only partially describe
   their state. So he draws a picture, of which the very first feature is
   the expression before us: "At that time ye were without Christ."
   (Ephes. ii. 12.) Now what does the expression mean?

   (a) A man is "without Christ" when he has no head-knowledge of Him.
   Millions, no doubt, are in this condition. They know not who Christ
   is--nor what He has done--nor what He taught--nor why He was
   crucified--nor where He is now--nor what He is to mankind. In short,
   they are entirely ignorant of Him. The heathen, of course, who never
   yet heard the Gospel come first under this description. But unhappily
   they do not stand alone. There are thousands of people living in
   England at this very day who have hardly any clearer ideas about Christ
   than the very heathen. Ask them what they know about Jesus Christ, and
   you will be astounded at the gross darkness which covers their minds.
   Visit them on their deathbeds and you will find that they can tell you
   no more about Christ than about Mahomet. Thousands are in this state in
   country parishes, and thousands in towns. And about all such persons
   but one account can be given. They are "without Christ."

   I am aware that some modern divines do not take the view which I have
   just stated. They tell us that all mankind have a part and interest in
   Christ, whether they know Him or not. They say that all men and women,
   however ignorant while they live, shall be taken by Christ's mercy to
   heaven when they die! Such views, I firmly believe, cannot be
   reconciled with God's Word. It is written, "This is life eternal, that
   they might know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou
   hast sent." (John xvii. 3.) It is one of the marks of the wicked, on
   whom God shall take vengeance at the last day, that they "know not
   God." (2 Thess. i. 8.) An unknown Christ is no Saviour. What shall be
   the state of the heathen after death?--how shall the savage, who never
   heard the Gospel, be judged?--in what manner will God deal with the
   helplessly ignorant and uneducated?--all these are questions which we
   may safely let alone. We may rest assured that "the Judge of all the
   earth will do right." (Gen. xviii. 25.) But we must not fly in the face
   of Scripture. If Bible words mean anything, to be ignorant of Christ is
   to be "without Christ."

   (b) But this is not all. A man is "without Christ" when he has no
   heart-faith in Him as his Saviour. It is quite possible to know all
   about Christ, and yet not to put our trust in Him. There are multitudes
   who know every article of the Belief, and can tell you glibly that
   Christ was "born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
   crucified, dead, and buried." They learned it at school. They have it
   sticking fast in their memories. But they make no practical use of
   their knowledge. They put their trust in something which is not
   "Christ." They hope to go to heaven because they are moral and
   well-conducted--because they say their prayers and go to
   Church--because they have been baptized and go to the Lord's Table. But
   as to a lively faith in God's mercy through Christ--a real, intelligent
   confidence in Christ's blood and righteousness and intercession--these
   are things of which they know nothing at all. And of all such persons I
   can see but one true account. They are "without Christ."

   I am aware that many do not admit the truth of what I have just said.
   Some tell us that all baptized people are members of Christ by virtue
   of their baptism. Others tell us that where there is a head-knowledge,
   we have no right to question a person's interest in Christ. To these
   views I have only one plain answer. The Bible forbids us to say that
   any man is joined to Christ until he believes. Baptism is no proof that
   we are joined to Christ. Simon Magus was baptized, and yet was
   distinctly told that he had "no part or lot in this matter." (Acts
   viii. 21.) Head-knowledge is no proof that we are joined to Christ. The
   devils know Christ well enough, but have no portion in Him. God knows,
   no doubt, who are His from all eternity. But man knows nothing of
   anyone's justification until he believes. The grand question is, "Do we
   believe?" It is written, "He that believeth not the Son shall not see
   life; but the wrath of God abideth on him." "He that believeth not
   shall be damned." (John iii. 36; Mark xvi. 16.) If Bible words mean
   anything, to be without faith is to be "without Christ."

   (c) But I have yet one thing more to say. A man is "without Christ"
   when the Holy Spirit's work cannot be seen in his life. Who can avoid
   seeing, if he uses his eyes, that myriads of professing Christians know
   nothing of inward conversion of heart? They will tell you that they
   believe the Christian religion; they go to their places of worship with
   tolerable regularity; they think it a proper thing to be married and
   buried with all the ceremonies of the Church; they would be much
   offended if their Christianity were doubted. But where is the Holy
   Ghost to be seen in their lives? What are their hearts and affections
   set upon? Whose is the image and superscription that stands out in
   their tastes, and habits, and ways? Alas, there can only be one reply!
   They know nothing experimentally of the renewing, sanctifying work of
   the Holy Ghost. They are yet dead to God. And of all such, only one
   account can be given. They are "without Christ."

   I am well aware, again, that few will admit this. The vast majority
   will tell you that it is extreme, and wild, and extravagant to require
   so much in Christians, and to press on every one conversion. They will
   say that it is impossible to keep up the high standard which I have
   just referred to, without going out of the world; and that we may
   surely go to heaven without being such very great saints. To all this I
   can only reply, What saith the Scripture? What saith the Lord? It is
   written, "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of
   God."--"Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall
   not enter into the kingdom of heaven."--"He that saith he abideth in
   Christ, ought himself also so to walk, even as He walked."--"If any man
   have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." (John iii. 3; Matt.
   xviii. 3; 1 John ii. 6; Rom. viii. 9.) The Scripture cannot be broken.
   If Bible words mean anything, to be without the Spirit is to be
   "without Christ."

   I commend the three propositions I have just laid down to your serious
   and prayerful consideration. Mark well what they come to. Examine them
   carefully on every side. In order to have a saving interest in Christ,
   knowledge, faith, and the grace of the Holy Ghost are absolutely
   needful. He that is without them is "without Christ."

   How painfully ignorant are many! They know literally nothing about
   religion. Christ, and the Holy Ghost, and faith, and grace, and
   conversion, and sanctification are mere "words and names" to them. They
   could not explain what they mean, if it were to save their lives. And
   can such ignorance as this take anyone to heaven? Impossible! Without
   knowledge, "without Christ!"

   How painfully self-righteous are many! They can talk complacently about
   having "done their duty," and being "kind to everybody," and having
   always "kept to their Church," and having "never been so very bad" as
   some--and therefore they seem to think they must go to heaven! And as
   to deep sense of sin and simple faith in Christ's blood and sacrifice,
   these seem to have no place in their religion. Their talk is all of
   doing and never of believing. And will such self-righteousness as this
   land anyone in heaven? Never! Without faith, "without Christ!"

   How painfully ungodly are many! They live in the habitual neglect of
   God's Sabbath, God's Bible, God's ordinances, and God's sacraments.
   They think nothing of doing things which God has flatly forbidden. They
   are constantly living in ways which are directly contrary to God's
   commandments. And can such ungodliness end in salvation? Impossible!
   Without the Holy Ghost, "without Christ!"

   I know well that at first sight these statements seem hard, and sharp,
   and rough, and severe. But after all, are they not God's truth as
   revealed to us in Scripture? If truth, ought they not to be made known?
   If necessary to be known, ought they not to be plainly laid down? If I
   know anything of my own heart, I desire above all things to magnify the
   riches of God's love to sinners. I long to tell all mankind what a
   wealth of mercy and loving-kindness there is laid up in God's heart for
   all who will seek it. But I cannot find anywhere that ignorant, and
   unbelieving, and unconverted people have any part in Christ! If I am
   wrong, I shall be thankful to anyone who will show me a more excellent
   way. But till I am shown it, I must stand fast on the positions I have
   already laid down. I dare not forsake them, lest I be found guilty of
   handling God's Word deceitfully. I dare not be silent about them, lest
   the blood of souls be required at my hands. The man without knowledge,
   without faith, and without the Holy Ghost, is a man "without Christ!"

   II. Let me now turn to another point which I wish to consider. What is
   the actual condition of a man "without Christ"?

   This is a branch of our present subject that demands very special
   attention. Thankful indeed should I be if I could exhibit it in its
   true colours. I can easily imagine some reader saying to himself,
   "Well, suppose I am without Christ, where is the mighty harm? I hope
   God will be merciful. I am no worse than many others. I trust all will
   be right at last." Listen to me, and, by God's help, I will try to show
   that you are sadly deceived. "Without Christ" all will not be right,
   but all desperately wrong.

   (a) For one thing, to be without Christ is to be without God. The
   Apostle St. Paul told the Ephesians as much as this in plain words. He
   ends the famous sentence which begins, "Ye were without Christ," by
   saying, "Ye were without God in the world." And who that thinks can
   wonder? That man can have very low ideas of God who does not conceive
   Him a most pure, and holy, and glorious, and spiritual Being. That man
   must be very blind who does not see that human nature is corrupt, and
   sinful, and defiled. How then can such a worm as man draw near to God
   with comfort? How can he look up to Him with confidence and not feel
   afraid? How can he speak to Him, have dealings with Him, look forward
   to dwelling with Him, without dread and alarm? There must be a Mediator
   between God and man, and there is but One that can fill the office.
   That One is Christ.

   Who art thou that talkest of God's mercy and God's love separate from
   and independent of Christ? There is no such love and mercy recorded in
   Scripture. Know this day that God out of Christ is "a consuming fire."
   (Heb. xii. 29.) Merciful He is, beyond all question: rich in mercy,
   plenteous in mercy. But His mercy is inseparably connected with the
   mediation of His beloved Son Jesus Christ. It must flow through Him as
   the appointed channel, or it cannot flow at all. It is written, "He
   that honoureth not the Son, honoureth not the Father which hath sent
   Him."--"I am the way, the truth, and the life: No man cometh unto the
   Father but by Me." (John v. 23; xiv. 6.) "Without Christ" we are
   without God.

   (b) For another thing, to be without Christ is to be without peace.
   Every man has a conscience within him, which must be satisfied before
   he can be truly happy. So long as this conscience is asleep or half
   dead, so long, no doubt, he gets along pretty well. But as soon as a
   man's conscience wakes up, and he begins to think of past sins, and
   present failings, and future judgment, at once he finds out that he
   needs something to give him inward rest. But what can do it? Repenting,
   and praying, and Bible-reading, and church-going, and
   sacrament-receiving, and self-mortification may be tried, and tried in
   vain. They never yet took off the burden from anyone's conscience. And
   yet peace must be had!

   There is only one thing can give peace to the conscience, and that is
   the blood of Jesus Christ sprinkled on it. A clear understanding that
   Christ's death was an actual payment of our debt to God, and that the
   merit of that death is made over to man when he believes, is the grand
   secret of inward peace. It meets every craving of conscience. It
   answers every accusation. It calms every fear. It is written, "These
   things I have spoken unto you, that in Me ye might have peace." "He is
   our peace." "Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through
   our Lord Jesus Christ." (John xvi. 33; Ephes. ii. 14; Rom. v. 1.) We
   have peace through the blood of His cross: peace like a deep
   mine--peace like an everflowing stream. But "without Christ" we are
   without peace.

   (e) For another thing, to be without Christ is to be without hope. Hope
   of some sort or other almost everyone thinks he possesses. Rarely
   indeed will you find a man who will boldly tell you that he has no hope
   at all about his soul. But how few there are that can give "a reason of
   the hope that is in them!" (1 Pet. iii. 15.) How few can explain it,
   describe it, and show its foundations! How many a hope is nothing
   better than a vague, empty feeling, which the day of sickness and the
   hour of death will prove to be utterly useless--impotent alike to
   comfort or to save.

   There is but one hope that has roots, life, strength and solidity, and
   that is the hope which is built on the great rock of Christ's work and
   office as man's Redeemer. "Other foundation can no man lay than that is
   laid, which is Jesus Christ." (1 Cor. iii. 11.) He that buildeth on
   this cornerstone "shall not be confounded." About this hope there is
   reality. It will bear looking at and handling. It will meet every
   enquiry. Search it through and through, and you will find no flaw
   whatever in it. All other hopes besides this are worthless. Like
   summer-dried fountains, they fail man just when his need is the sorest.
   They are like unsound ships, which look well so long as they lie quiet
   in harbour, but when the winds and the waves of the ocean begin to try
   them, their rotten condition is discovered, and they sink beneath the
   waters. There is no such thing as a good hope without Christ, and
   "without Christ" is to have "no hope." (Eph. ii. 12.)

   (d) For another thing, to be without Christ is to be without heaven. In
   saying this I do not merely mean that there is no entrance into heaven,
   but that "without Christ" there could be no happiness in being there. A
   man without a Saviour and Redeemer could never feel at home in heaven.
   He would feel that he had no lawful right or title to be there:
   boldness and confidence and ease of heart would be impossible. Amidst
   pure and holy angels, under the eyes of a pure and holy God, he could
   not hold up his head: he would feel confounded and ashamed. It is the
   very essence of all true views of heaven that Christ is there.

   Who art thou that dreamest of a heaven in which Christ has no place?
   Awake to know thy folly. Know that in every description of heaven which
   the Bible contains, the presence of Christ is one essential feature.
   "In the midst of the throne," says St, John, "stood a Lamb as it had
   been slain." The very throne of heaven is called the "throne of God and
   of the Lamb."--"The Lamb is the light of heaven, and the temple of
   it."--The saints who dwell in heaven are to be "fed by the Lamb," and
   "led to living fountains of waters." The meeting of the saints in
   heaven is called, "the marriage supper of the Lamb." (Rev. v. 6; xxii.
   3; xxi. 22, 23; vii. 17; xix. 9.) A heaven without Christ would not be
   the heaven of the Bible. To be "without Christ" is to be without
   heaven.

   I might easily add to these things. I might tell you that to be without
   Christ is to be without fife, without strength, without safety, without
   foundation, without a friend in heaven, without righteousness. None so
   badly off as those that are without Christ!

   What the ark was to Noah, what the passover lamb was to Israel in
   Egypt, what the manna, the smitten rock, the brazen serpent, the pillar
   of cloud and fire, the scapegoat, were to the tribes in the wilderness,
   all this the Lord Jesus is meant to be to man's soul. None so destitute
   as those that are without Christ!

   What the root is to the branches, what the air is to our lungs, what
   food and water are to our bodies, what the sun is to creation, all this
   and much more Christ is intended to be to us. None so helpless, none so
   pitiable as those that are without Christ!

   I grant that, if there were no such things as sickness and death--if
   men and women never grew old, and lived on this earth for ever--the
   subject of this paper would be of no importance. But you must know that
   sickness, death, and the grave are sad realities.

   If this life were all--if there were no judgment, no heaven, no hell,
   no eternity--it would be mere waste of time to trouble yourself with
   such inquiries as this tract suggests. But you have got a conscience.
   You know well that there is a reckoning-day beyond the grave. There is
   a judgment yet to come.

   Surely the subject of this paper is no light matter. It is not a small
   thing, and one that does not signify. It demands the attention of every
   sensible person. It lies at the very root of that all-important
   question, the salvation of our souls. To be "without Christ" is to be
   most miserable.

   (1) And now I ask every one who has read this paper through to examine
   himself and find out his own precise condition. Are you without Christ?

   Do not allow life to pass away without some serious thoughts and
   self-inquiry. You cannot always go on as you do now. A day must come
   when eating, and drinking, and sleeping, and dressing, and making
   merry, and spending money, will have an end. There will be a day when
   your place will be empty and you will be only spoken of as one dead and
   gone. And where will you be then^ if you have lived and died without
   thought about your soul, without God, and without Christ? Oh, remember,
   it is better a thousand times to be without money, and health, and
   friends, and company, and good cheer, than to be without Christ!

   (2) If you have lived without Christ hitherto, I invite you in all
   affection to change your course without delay. Seek the Lord Jesus
   while He may be found. Call upon Him while He is near. He is sitting at
   God's right hand, able to save to the uttermost everyone who comes to
   Him, however sinful and careless he may have been. He is sitting at
   God's right hand, willing to hear the prayer of every one who feels
   that his past life has been all wrong, and wants to be set right. Seek
   Christ, seek Christ without delay. Acquaint yourself with Him. Do not
   be ashamed to apply to Him. Only become one of Christ's friends this
   year, and you will say one day it was the happiest year that you ever
   had.

   (3) If you have become one of Christ's friends already, I exhort you to
   be a thankful man. Awake to a deeper sense of the infinite mercy of
   having an Almighty Saviour, a title to heaven, a home that is eternal,
   a Friend that never dies! A few more years and all our family
   gatherings will be over. What a comfort to think that we have in Christ
   something that we can never lose!

   Awake to a deeper sense of the sorrowful state of those who are
   "without Christ." We are often reminded of the many who are without
   food, or clothing, or school, or church. Let us pity them, and help
   them, as far as we can. But let us never forget that there are people
   whose state is far more pitiable. Who are they? The people "without
   Christ!"

   Have we relatives "without Christ"? Let us feel for them, pray for
   them, speak to the King about them, strive to recommend the Gospel to
   them. Let us leave no stone unturned in our efforts to bring them to
   Christ.

   Have we neighbours "without Christ"? Let us labour in every way for
   their souls' salvation. The night cometh when none can work. Happy is
   he who lives under the abiding conviction that to be "in Christ" is
   peace, safety, and happiness; and that to be "without Christ" is to be
   on the brink of destruction.
     __________________________________________________________________

XVII.
THIRST RELIEVED

   "In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried,
   saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto Me, and drink. He that
   believeth on Me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall
   flow rivers of living water."--John vii. 37-38.

   THE text which heads this chapter contains one of those mighty sayings
   of Christ which deserve to be printed in letters of gold. All the stars
   in heaven are bright and beautiful; yet even a child can see that one
   star excelleth another in glory. All Scripture is given by inspiration
   of God; but that heart must indeed be cold and dull which does not feel
   that some verses are peculiarly rich and full. Of such verses this text
   is one.

   In order to see the whole force and beauty of the text, we must
   remember the place, the time, and the occasion when it comes in.

   The place, then, was Jerusalem, the metropolis of Judaism, and the
   stronghold of priests and scribes, of Pharisees and Sadducees.--The
   occasion was the Feast of Tabernacles, one of those great annual feasts
   when every Jew, if he could, went up to the temple, according to the
   law.--The time was "the last day of the feast," when all the ceremonies
   were drawing to a close, when the water drawn from the fountain of
   Siloam, according to traditional custom, had been solemnly poured on
   the altar, and nothing remained for worshippers but to return home.

   At this critical moment, our Lord Jesus Christ "stood" forward on a
   prominent place, and spoke to the assembled crowds. I doubt not He read
   their hearts. He saw them going away with aching consciences and
   unsatisfied minds, having got nothing from their blind teachers the
   Pharisees and Sadducees, and carrying away nothing but a barren
   recollection of pompous forms. He saw and pitied them, and cried aloud,
   like a herald, "If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and
   drink."--That this was all our Lord said on this memorable occasion, I
   take leave to doubt. I suspect it is only the key-note of His address.
   But this, I imagine, was the first sentence that fell from His lips:
   "If any man thirst, let him come unto Me." If anyone wants living,
   satisfying water, let him come unto ME.

   Let me remind my readers, in passing, that no prophet or apostle ever
   took on himself to use such language as this. "Come with us," said
   Moses to Hobab (Num. x. 29); "Come to the waters," says Isaiah (Isa.
   lv. 1); "Behold the Lamb," says John the Baptist (John i. 29); "Believe
   on the Lord Jesus Christ," says St. Paul (Acts xvi. 31) But no one
   except Jesus of Nazareth ever said, "Come to ME." That fact is very
   significant. He that said,"Come to Me," knew and felt, when He said it,
   that He was the eternal Son of God, the promised Messiah, the Saviour
   of the world.

   There are three points in this great saying of our Lord to which I now
   propose to direct attention.

   I. You have a case supposed: "If any man thirst."

   II. You have a remedy proposed: "Let him come unto Me, and drink."

   III. You have a promise held out: "He that believeth on Me, as the
   Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
   waters."

   Each of these points concerns all into whose hands this paper may fall.
   On each of them I have somewhat to say.

   I. In the first place, then, you have a case supposed. Our Lord says,
   "If any man thirst."

   Bodily thirst is notoriously the most painful sensation to which the
   frame of mortal man is liable. Read the story of the miserable
   sufferers in the black hole at Calcutta.--Ask anyone who has travelled
   over desert plains under a tropical sun.--Hear what any old soldier
   will tell you is the chief want of the wounded on a
   battlefield.--Remember what the crews of ships lost in mid-ocean,
   tossed for days in boats without water, go through.--Mark the awful
   words of the rich man in the parable: "Send Lazarus that he may dip the
   tip of his finger in water to cool my tongue: for I am tormented in
   this flame." (Luke xvi. 24.) The testimony is unvarying. There is
   nothing so terrible and hard to bear as thirst.

   But if bodily thirst is so painful, how much more painful is thirst of
   soul? Physical suffering is not the worst part of eternal punishment.
   It is a light thing, even in this world, compared to the suffering of
   the mind and inward man. To see the value of our souls, and find out
   they are in danger of eternal ruin--to feel the burden of unforgiven
   sin, and not to know where to turn for relief--to have a conscience
   sick and ill at ease, and to be ignorant of the remedy--to discover
   that we are dying, dying daily, and yet unprepared to meet God--to have
   some clear view of our own guilt and wickedness, and yet to be in utter
   darkness about absolution--this is the highest degree of pain--the pain
   which drinks up soul and spirit, and pierces joints and marrow! And
   this no doubt is the thirst of which our Lord is speaking. It is thirst
   after pardon, forgiveness, absolution, and peace with God. It is the
   craving of a really awakened conscience, wanting satisfaction and not
   knowing where to find it, walking through dry places and unable to get
   rest.

   This is the thirst which the Jews felt when Peter preached to them on
   the day of Penetcost. It is written that they were "pricked In their
   heart, and said, Men and brethren, what shall we do?" (Acts ii. 37.)

   This is the thirst which the Philippian jailor felt, when he awoke to
   consciousness of his spiritual danger and felt the earthquake making
   the prison reel under his feet. It is written that he "came trembling,
   and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought them out, saying,
   Sirs, what must I do to be saved?" (Acts xvi. 30.)

   This is the thirst which many of the greatest servants of God seem to
   have felt when light first broke in on their minds. Augustine seeking
   rest among the Manichean heretics and finding none--Luther groping
   after truth among monks in Erfurt Monastery--John Bunyan agonizing
   amidst doubts and conflicts in his Elstow cottage--George Whitefield
   groaning under self-imposed austerities, for want of clear teaching,
   when an undergraduate at Oxford--all have left on record their
   experience. I believe they all knew what our Lord meant when He spoke
   of "thirst."

   And surely it is not too much to say that all of us ought to know
   something of this thirst, if not as much as Augustine, Luther, Bunyan,
   or Whitefield. Living as we do in a dying world--knowing as we do, if
   we will confess it, that there is a world beyond the grave, and that
   after death comes the judgment--feeling, as we must do in our better
   moments, what poor, weak, unstable, defective creatures we all are, and
   how unfit to meet God--conscious as we must be in our inmost heart of
   hearts, that on our use of time depends our place in eternity--we ought
   to feel and to realise something like "thirst" for a sense of peace
   with the living God. But alas, nothing proves so conclusively the
   fallen nature of man as the general, common want of spiritual appetite!
   For money, for power, for pleasure, for rank, for honour, for
   distinction--for all these the vast majority are now intensely
   thirsting. To lead forlorn hopes, to dig for gold, to storm a breach,
   to try to hew a way through thick-ribbed ice to the North Pole, for all
   these objects there is no lack of adventurers and volunteers. Fierce
   and unceasing is the competition for these corruptible crowns! But few
   indeed, by comparison, are those who thirst after eternal life. No
   wonder that the natural man is called in Scripture "dead," and
   "sleeping," and blind, and deaf. No wonder that he is said to need a
   second birth and a new creation. There is no surer symptom or
   mortification in the body than the loss of all feeling. There is no
   more painful sign of an unhealthy state of soul than an utter absence
   or spiritual thirst. Woe to that man of whom the Saviour can say, "Thou
   knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
   and naked." (Rev. iii. 17.)

   But who is there among the readers of this paper that feels the burden
   of sin, and longs for peace with God? Who is there that really feels
   the words of our Prayer-book Confession: "I have erred and strayed like
   a lost sheep--there is no health in me--I am a miserable offender"? Who
   is there that enters into the fullness of our Communion Service, and
   can say with truth, "The remembrance of my sins is grievous, and the
   burden of them is intolerable"? You are the man that ought to thank
   God. A sense of sin, guilt, and poverty of soul, is the first stone
   laid by the Holy Ghost when He builds a spiritual temple. He convinces
   of sin. Light was the first thing called into being in the material
   creation. (Gen. i. 3.) Light about our own state is the first work in
   the new creation. Thirsting soul, I say again, you are the person who
   ought to thank God. The kingdom of God is near you. It is not when we
   begin to feel good, but when we feel bad, that we take the first step
   towards heaven. Who taught thee that thou wast naked? Whence came this
   inward light? Who opened thine eyes and made thee see and feel? Know
   this day that flesh and blood hath not revealed these things unto thee,
   but our Father which is in heaven. Universities may confer degrees, and
   schools may impart knowledge of all mysteries, but they cannot make men
   feel sin. To realise our spiritual need, and feel true spiritual
   thirst, is the A B C in saving Christianity.

   It is a great saying of Elihu, in the book of Job--"God looketh upon
   men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right,
   and it profited me not; He will deliver his soul from death, and his
   life shall see the light." (Job xxxiii. 27, 28.) Let him that knows
   anything of spiritual "thirst" not be ashamed. Rather let him lift up
   his head and begin to hope. Let him pray that God would carry on the
   work He has begun, and make him feel more.

   II. I pass from the case supposed to the remedy proposed. "If any man
   thirst," says our blessed Lord Jesus Christ, "let him come unto Me, and
   drink."

   There is a grand simplicity about this little sentence which cannot be
   too much admired. There is not a word in it of which the literal
   meaning is not plain to a child. Yet, simple as it appears, it is rich
   in spiritual meaning. Like the Koh-i-noor diamond, which you may carry
   between finger and thumb, it is of unspeakable value. It solves that
   mighty problem which all the philosophers of Greece and Rome could
   never solve--"How can man have peace with God? "Place it in your memory
   side by side with six other golden sayings of your Lord. "I am the
   Bread of life: he that cometh unto me shall never hunger; and he that
   believeth on me shall never thirst."--"I am the Light of the world: he
   that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light
   of life."--"I am the Door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be
   saved."--"I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: no man cometh unto the
   Father but by me."--"Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy
   laden, and I will give you rest."--" Him that cometh to me I will in no
   wise cast out."--Add to these six texts the one before you to-day. Get
   the whole seven by heart. Rivet them down in your mind, and never let
   them go. When your feet touch the cold river, on the bed of sickness
   and in the hour of death, you will find these seven texts above all
   price. (John vi. 35; viii. 12; x. 9; xiv. 6; Matt. xi. 28; John vi.
   37.)

   For what is the sum and substance of these simple words? It is this.
   Christ is that Fountain of living water which God has graciously
   provided for thirsting souls. From Him, as out of the rock smitten by
   Moses, there flows an abundant stream for all who travel through the
   wilderness of this world. In Him, as our Redeemer and Substitute,
   crucified for our sins and raised again for our justification, there is
   an endless supply of all that men can need--pardon, absolution, mercy,
   grace, peace, rest, relief, comfort, and hope.

   This rich provision Christ has bought for us at the price of His own
   precious blood. To open this wondrous fountain He suffered for sin, the
   just for the unjust, and bore our sins in His own body on the tree. He
   was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
   righteousness of God in Him. (1 Peter ii. 24; iii. 18; 2 Cor. v. 21.)
   And now He is sealed and appointed to be the Reliever of all who are
   labouring and heavy laden, and the Giver of living water to all who
   thirst. It is His office to receive sinners. It is His pleasure to give
   them pardon, life, and peace. And the words of the text are a
   proclamation He makes to all mankind--"If any man thirst, let him come
   unto Me, and drink."

   The efficacy of a medicine depends in great measure on the manner in
   which it is used. The best prescription of the best physician is
   useless if we refuse to follow the directions which accompany it.
   Suffer the word of exhortation, while I offer some caution and advice
   about the Fountain of living water.

   (a) He that thirsts and wants relief must come to Christ Himself. He
   must not be content with coming to His Church and His ordinances, or to
   the assemblies of His people for prayer and praise. He must not stop
   short even at His holy table, or rest satisfied with privately opening
   his heart to His ordained ministers. Oh, no! he that is content with
   only drinking these waters "shall thirst again." (John iv. 13.) He must
   go higher, further, much further than this. He must have personal
   dealings with Christ Himself: all else in religion is worthless without
   Him. The King's palace, the attendant servants, the richly furnished
   banqueting house, the very banquet itself--all are nothing unless we
   speak with the King. His hand alone can take the burden off our backs
   and make us feel free. The hand of man may take the stone from the
   grave and show the dead; but none but Jesus can say to the dead, "Come
   forth and live." (John xi. 41-43.) We must deal directly with Christ.

   (b) Again: he that thirsts and wants relief from Christ must actually
   come to Him. It is not enough to wish, and talk, and mean, and intend,
   and resolve, and hope. Hell, that awful reality, is truly said to be
   paved with good intentions. Thousands are yearly lost in this fashion,
   and perish miserably just outside the harbour. Meaning and intending
   they live; meaning and intending they die. Oh, no! we must "arise and
   come!" If the prodigal son had been content with saying, "How many
   hired servants of my father have bread enough and to spare, and I
   perish with hunger! I hope some day to return home," he might have
   remained for ever among the swine. It was when he arose and came to his
   father that his father ran to meet him, and said, "Bring forth the best
   robe and put it on him.--Let us eat and be merry." (Luke xv. 20-23.)
   Like him, we must not only "come to ourselves" and think, but we must
   actually come to the High Priest, to Christ. We must come to the
   Physician.

   (c) Once again: he that thirsts and wants to come to Christ must
   remember that simple faith is the one thing required. By all means let
   him come with a penitent, broken and contrite heart; but let him not
   dream of resting on that for acceptance. Faith is the only hand that
   can carry the living water to our lips. Faith is the hinge on which all
   turns in the matter of our justification. It is written again and again
   that "whosoever believeth shall not perish, but have eternal life."
   (John iii. 15, 16.) "To him that worketh not, but believeth on Him that
   justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness." (Rom.
   iv. 5.) Happy is he that can lay hold on the principle laid down in
   that matchless hymn--


   Just as I am! without one plea

   But that Thy blood was shed for me,

   And that Thou bidst me come to Thee--

   O Lamb of God, I come!

   How simple this remedy for thirst appears! But oh, how hard it is to
   persuade some persons to receive it! Tell them to do some great thing,
   to mortify their bodies, to go on pilgrimage, to give all their goods
   to feed the poor, and so to merit salvation, and they will try to do as
   they are bid. Tell them to throw overboard all idea of merit, working,
   or doing, and to come to Christ as empty sinners, with nothing in their
   hands, and, like Naaman, they are ready to turn away in disdain. (2
   Kings v. 12.) Human nature is always the same in every age. There are
   still some people just like the Jews, and some like the Greeks. To the
   Jews Christ crucified is still a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks
   foolishness. Their succession, at any rate, has never ceased! Never did
   our Lord say a truer word than that which He spoke to the proud scribes
   in the Sanhedrim--"ye will not come unto Me that ye might have life."
   (John v. 40.)

   But, simple as this remedy for thirst appears, it is the only cure for
   man's spiritual disease, and the only bridge from earth to heaven.
   Kings and their subjects, preachers and hearers, masters and servants,
   high and low, rich and poor, learned and unlearned, all must alike
   drink of this water of life, and drink in the same way. For eighteen
   centuries men have laboured to find some other medicine for weary
   consciences; but they have laboured in vain. Thousands, after
   blistering their hands, and growing grey in hewing out "broken cisterns
   which can hold no water" (Jer. ii. 13), have been obliged to come back
   at last to the old Fountain, and have confessed in their latest moments
   that here, in Christ alone, is true peace.

   And simple as the old remedy for thirst may appear, it is the root of
   the inward life of all God's greatest servants in all ages. What have
   the saints and martyrs been in every era of Church history, but men who
   came to Christ daily by faith, and found "His flesh meat indeed and His
   blood drink indeed?" (John vi. 55.) What have they all been but men who
   lived the life of faith in the Son of God, and drank daily out of the
   fulness there is in Him? (Gal. ii. 20.) Here, at all events, the truest
   and best Christians, who have made a mark on the world, have been of
   one mind. Holy Fathers and Reformers, holy Anglican divines and
   Puritans, holy Episcopalians and Nonconformists, have all in their best
   moments borne uniform testimony to the value of the Fountain of life.
   Separated and contentious as they may sometimes have been in their
   lives, in their deaths they have not been divided. In their last
   struggle with the king of terrors they have simply clung to the cross
   of Christ, and gloried in nothing but the "precious blood," and the
   Fountain open for all sin and uncleanness.

   How thankful we ought to be that we live in a land where the great
   remedy for spiritual thirst is known--in a land of open Bibles,
   preached Gospel, and abundant means of grace--in a land where the
   efficacy of Christ's sacrifice is still proclaimed, with more or less
   fulness, in 20,000 pulpits every Sunday! We do not realise the value of
   our privileges. The very familiarity of the manna makes us think of it
   just as Israel loathed "the light bread" in the wilderness. (Num. xxi.
   5.) But turn to the pages of a heathen philosopher like the
   incomparable Plato, and see how he groped after light like one
   blindfolded, and wearied himself to find the door. The humblest peasant
   who grasps the four "comfortable words" of our beautiful Communion
   Service in the Prayer-book knows more of the way of peace with God than
   the Athenian sage.--Turn to the accounts which trustworthy travellers
   and missionaries give of the state of the heathen who have never heard
   the Gospel. Read of the human sacrifices in Africa, and the ghastly,
   self-imposed tortures of the devotees of Hindostan, and remember they
   are all the result of an unquenched "thirst" and a blind and
   unsatisfied desire to get near to God. And then learn to be thankful
   that your lot is cast in a land like your own. Alas, I fear God has a
   controversy with us for our unthankfulness! Cold indeed, and dead, must
   that heart be which can study the condition of Africa, China, and
   Hindostan, and not thank God that he lives in Christian England.

   III. I turn, in the last place, to the promise held out to all who come
   to Christ. "He that believeth on Me, as the Scripture hath said, out of
   his belly shall flow rivers of living water."

   The subject of Scripture promises is a vast and most interesting one. I
   doubt whether it receives the attention which it deserves in the
   present day. "Clarke's Scripture Promises" is an old book which is far
   less studied now, I suspect, than it was in the days of our fathers.
   Few Christians realize the number, and length, and breadth, and depth,
   and height, and variety of the precious "shalls" and "wills" laid up in
   the Bible for the special benefit and encouragement of all who will use
   them.

   Yet promise lies at the bottom of nearly all the transactions of man
   with man in the affairs of this life. The vast majority of Adam's
   children in every civilized country are acting every day on the faith
   of promises. The labourer on the land works hard from Monday morning to
   Saturday night, because he believes that at the end of the week he
   shall receive his promised wages. The soldier enlists in the army, and
   the sailor enters his name on the ship's books in the navy, in the full
   confidence that those under whom they serve will at some future time
   give them their promised pay. The humblest maid-servant in a family
   works on from day to day at her appointed duties, in the belief that
   her mistress will give her the promised wages. In the business of great
   cities, among merchants, and bankers, and tradesmen, nothing could be
   done without incessant faith in promises. Every man of sense knows that
   cheques and bills, and promissory notes, are the only means by which
   the immense majority of mercantile affairs can possibly be carried on.
   Men of business are compelled to act by faith and not by sight. They
   believe promises, and expect to be believed themselves. In fact,
   promises, and faith in promises, and actions springing from faith in
   promises, are the back-bone of nine-tenths of all the dealings of man
   with his fellow-men throughout Christendom.

   Now promises, in like manner, in the religion of the Bible, are one
   grand means by which God is pleased to approach the soul of man. The
   careful student of Scripture cannot fail to observe that God is
   continually holding out inducements to man to listen to Him, obey Him,
   and serve Him, and undertaking to do great things, if man will only
   attend and believe. In short, as St. Peter says, "There are given to us
   exceeding great and precious promises." (2 Pet. i. 4.) He who has
   mercifully caused all Holy Scripture to be written for our learning has
   shown His perfect knowledge of human nature, by spreading over the Book
   a perfect wealth of promises, suitable to every kind of experience and
   every condition of life. He seems to say, "Would you know what I
   undertake to do for you? Do you want to hear my terms? "--"Take up the
   Bible and read."

   But there is one grand difference between the promises of Adam's
   children and the promises of God, which ought never to be forgotten.
   The promises of man are not sure to be fulfilled. With the best wishes
   and intentions, he cannot always keep his word. Disease and death may
   step in like an armed man, and take away from this world him that
   promises. War, or pestilence, or famine, or failure of crops, or
   hurricanes, may strip him of his property, and make it impossible for
   him to fulfil his engagements. The promises of God, on the contrary,
   are certain to be kept. He is Almighty: nothing can prevent His doing
   what He has said. He never changes: He is always "of one mind": and
   with Him there is "no variableness or shadow of turning." (Job xxiii.
   13; James 1. 17.) He will always keep His word. There is one thing
   which, as a little girl once told her teacher, to her surprise, God
   cannot do: "It is impossible for God to lie." (Heb. vi. 18.) The most
   unlikely and improbable things, when God has once said He will do them,
   have always come to pass. The destruction of the old world by a flood,
   and the preservation of Noah in the ark, the birth of Isaac, the
   deliverance of Israel from Egypt, the raising of David to the throne of
   Saul, the miraculous birth of Christ, the resurrection of Christ, the
   scattering of the Jews all over the earth, and their continued
   preservation as a distinct people--who could imagine events more
   unlikely and improbable than these? Yet God said they should be, and in
   due time they all came to pass. In truth, with God it is just as easy
   to do a thing as to say it. Whatever He promises, He is certain to
   perform.

   Concerning the variety and riches of Scripture promises, far more might
   be said than it is possible to say in a short paper like this. Their
   name is legion. The subject is almost inexhaustible. There is hardly a
   step in man's life, from childhood to old age, hardly any position in
   which man can be placed, for which the Bible has not held out
   encouragement to everyone who desires to do right in the sight of God.
   There are "shalls" and "wills" in God's treasury for every condition.
   About God's infinite mercy and compassion--about His readiness to
   receive all who repent and believe--about His willingness to forgive,
   pardon, and absolve the chief of sinners--about His power to change
   hearts and alter our corrupt nature--about the encouragements to pray,
   and hear the Gospel, and draw near to the throne of grace--about
   strength for duty, comfort in trouble, guidance in perplexity, help in
   sickness, consolation in death, support under bereavement, happiness
   beyond the grave, reward in glory--about all these things there is an
   abundant supply of promises in the Word. No one can form an idea of its
   abundance unless he carefully searches the Scriptures, keeping the
   subject steadily in view. If anyone doubts it, I can only say, "Come
   and see." Like the Queen of Sheba at Solomon's Court, you will soon
   say, "The half was not told me." (1 Kings x. 7.)

   The promise of our Lord Jesus Christ which heads this paper is somewhat
   peculiar. It is singularly rich in encouragement to all who feel
   spiritual thirst, and come to Him for relief, and therefore it deserves
   peculiar attention. Most of our Lord's promises refer specially to the
   benefit of the person to whom they are addressed. The promise before us
   takes a far wider range: it seems to refer to many others beside those
   to whom He spoke. For what says He?--"He that believeth on Me, as the
   Scripture hath said" (and everywhere teaches), "out of his belly shall
   flow rivers of living water. But this spake He of the Spirit, which
   they that believe on Him should receive." Figurative undoubtedly are
   these words--figurative, like the earlier words of the
   sentence--figurative, like "thirst" and "drinking." But all the figures
   of Scripture contain great truth; and what the figure before us was
   meant to convey I will now try to show.

   (1) For one thing, then, I believe our Lord meant that he who comes to
   Him by faith shall receive an abundant supply of everything that he can
   desire for the relief of his own soul's wants. The Spirit shall convey
   to him such an abiding sense of pardon, peace and hope, that it shall
   be in his inward man like a well-spring, never dry. He shall feel so
   satisfied with "the things of Christ," which the Spirit shall show him
   (John xvi. 15), that he shall rest from spiritual anxiety about death,
   judgment, and eternity. He may have his seasons of darkness and doubt,
   through his own infirmities or the temptations of the devil. But,
   speaking generally, when he has once come to Christ by faith, he shall
   find in his heart of hearts an unfailing fountain of consolation. This,
   let us understand, is the first thing which the promise before us
   contains. "Only come to Me, poor anxious soul," our Lord seems to
   say--"Only come to Me, and thy spiritual anxiety shall be relieved. I
   will place in thy heart, by the power of the Holy Spirit, such a sense
   of pardon and peace, through My atonement and intercession, that thou
   shalt never completely thirst again. Thou mayest have thy doubts, and
   fears, and conflicts, while thou art in the body. But once having come
   to Me, and taken Me for thy Saviour, thou shalt never feel thyself
   entirely hopeless. The condition of thine inward man shall be so
   thoroughly changed that thou shalt feel as if there were within thee an
   ever-flowing spring of water."

   What shall we say to these things? I declare my own belief that
   whenever a man or woman really comes to Christ by faith, he finds this
   promise fulfilled. He may possibly be weak in grace, and have many
   misgivings about his own condition. He may possibly not dare to say
   that he is converted, justified, sanctified, and meet for the
   inheritance of the saints in light. But, for all that, I am bold to
   say, the humblest and feeblest believer in Christ has got something
   within him which he would not part with, though he may not yet fully
   understand it. And what is that "something"? It is just that "river of
   living water" which begins to run in the heart of every child of Adam
   as soon as he comes to Christ and drinks. In this sense I believe this
   wonderful promise of Christ is always fulfilled.

   (2) But is this all that is contained in the promise which heads this
   paper? By no means. There yet remains much behind. There is more to
   follow. I believe our Lord meant us to understand that he who comes to
   Him by faith shall not only have an abundant supply of everything which
   he needs for his own soul, but shall also become a source of blessing
   to the souls of others. The Spirit who dwells in him shall make him a
   fountain of good to his fellow-men, so that at the last day there shall
   be found to have flowed from him "rivers of living water."

   This is a most important part of our Lord's promise, and opens up a
   subject which is seldom realized and grasped by many Christians. But it
   is one of deep interest, and deserves far more attention than it
   receives. I believe it to be a truth of God. I believe that just as "no
   man liveth unto himself" (Rom. xiv. 7), so also no man is converted
   only for himself; and that the conversion of one man or woman always
   leads on, in God's wonderful providence, to the conversion of others. I
   do not say for a moment that all believers know it. I think it far more
   likely that many live and die in the faith, who are not aware that they
   have done good to any soul. But I believe the resurrection morning and
   the judgment day, when the secret history of all Christians is
   revealed, will prove that the full meaning of the promise before us has
   never failed. I doubt if there will be a believer who will not have
   been to some one or other a "river of living water"--a channel through
   whom the Spirit has conveyed saving grace. Even the penitent thief,
   short as his time was after he repented, has been a source of blessing
   to thousands of souls!

   (a) Some believers are "rivers of living water" while they live. Their
   words, their conversation, their preaching, their teaching, are all
   means by which the water of life has flowed into the hearts of their
   fellow-men. Such, for example, were the Apostles, who wrote no
   Epistles, and only preached the Word. Such were Luther, and Whitefield,
   and Wesley, and Berridge, and Rowlands, and thousands of others, of
   whom I cannot now speak particularly.

   (b) Some believers are "rivers of living water" when they die. Their
   courage in facing the king of terrors, their boldness in the most
   painful sufferings, their unswerving faithfulness to Christ's truth
   even at the stake, their manifest peace on the edge of the grave--all
   this has set thousands thinking, and led hundreds to repent and
   believe. Such, for example, were the primitive martyrs whom the Roman
   Emperors persecuted. Such were John Huss, and Jerome of Prague. Such
   were Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, and the noble army of Marian
   martyrs. The work that they did at their deaths, like Samson, was far
   greater than the work done in their lives.

   (c) Some believers are "rivers of living water" long after they die.
   They do good by their books and writings in every part of the world,
   long after the hands which held the pen are mouldering in the dust.
   Such men were Bunyan, and Baxter, and Owen, and George Herbert, and
   Robert M'Cheyne. These blessed servants of God do more good probably by
   their books at this moment, than they did by their tongues when they
   were alive. "Being dead they yet speak." (Heb. xi. 4.)

   (d) Finally, there are some believers who are "rivers of living water"
   by the beauty of their daily conduct and behaviour. There are many
   quiet, gentle, consistent Christians who make no show and no noise in
   the world, and yet insensibly exercise a deep influence for good on all
   around them. They "win without the Word." (1 Peter iii. 1.) Their love,
   their kindness, their sweet temper, their patience, their
   unselfishness, tell silently on a wide circle, and sow seeds of thought
   and self-inquiry in many minds. It was a fine testimony of an old lady
   who died in great peace, saying that under God she owed her salvation
   to Mr. Whiteneld:--"It was not any sermon that he preached; it was not
   anything that he ever said to me. It was the beautiful consistency and
   kindness of his daily life, in the house where he was staying, when I
   was a little girl. I said to myself, if I ever have any religion, Mr.
   Whitefield's God shall be my God."

   Let us all lay hold on this view of our Lord's promise, and never
   forget it. Think not for a moment that your own soul is the only soul
   that will be saved if you come to Christ by faith and follow Him. Think
   of the blessedness of being a "river of living water" to others. Who
   can tell that you may not be the means of bringing many others to
   Christ? Live, and act, and speak, and pray, and work, keeping this
   continually in view. I knew a family, consisting of a father, mother,
   and ten children, in which true religion began with one of the
   daughters; and when it began she stood alone, and all the rest of the
   family were in the world. And yet, before she died, she saw both her
   parents and all her brothers and sisters converted to God, and all
   this, humanly speaking, began from her influence! Surely, in the face
   of this, we need not doubt that a believer may be to others a "river of
   living water." Conversions may not be in your time, and you may die
   without seeing them. But never doubt that conversion generally leads to
   conversions, and that few go to heaven alone. When Grimshaw, of
   Haworth, the apostle of the north, died, he left his son graceless and
   godless. Afterwards the son was converted, never having forgotten his
   father's advice and example. And his last words were, "What will my old
   father say when he sees me in heaven?" Let us take courage and hope on,
   believing Christ's promise.

   (1) And now, before I close this paper, let me ask you a plain
   question. Do you know anything of spiritual thirst? Have you ever felt
   anything of genuine deep concern about your soul?--I fear that many
   know nothing about it. I have learned, by the painful experience of the
   third of a century, that people may go on for years attending God's
   house and yet never feel their sins, or desire to be saved. The cares
   of this world, the love of pleasure, the "lust of other things" choke
   the good seed every Sunday, and make it unfruitful. They come to church
   with hearts as cold as the stone pavement on which they walk. They go
   away as thoughtless and unmoved as the old marble busts which look down
   on them from the monuments on the walls. Well, it may be so; but I do
   not despair of anyone, so long as he is alive. That grand old bell in
   St. Paul's Cathedral, London, which has struck the Hours for so many
   years, is seldom heard by many during the business hours of the day.
   The roar and din of traffic in the streets have a strange power to
   deaden its sound, and prevent men hearing it. But when the daily work
   is over, and desks are locked, and doors are closed, and books are put
   away, and quiet reigns in the great city, the case is altered. As the
   old bell at night strikes eleven, and twelve, and one, and two, and
   three, thousands hear it who never heard it during the day. And so I
   hope it will be with many an one in the matter of his soul. Now, in the
   plenitude of health and strength, in the hurry and whirl of business, I
   fear the voice of your conscience is often stifled, and you cannot hear
   it. But the day may come when the great bell of conscience will make
   itself heard, whether you like it or not. The time may come when, laid
   aside in quietness, and obliged by illness to sit still, you may be
   forced to look within, and consider your soul's concerns. And then,
   when the great bell of awakened conscience is sounding in your ears, I
   trust that many a man who reads this paper may hear the voice of God
   and repent, may learn to thirst, and learn to come to Christ for
   relief. Yes, I pray God you may be taught to feel before it be too
   late!

   (2) But do you feel anything at this very moment? Is your conscience
   awake and working? Are you sensible of spiritual thirst, and longing
   for relief? Then hear the invitation which I bring you in my Master's
   name this day:--"If any man," no matter who he may be--if any man, high
   or low, rich or poor, learned or unlearned--"if any man thirst, let him
   come to Christ and drink." Hear and accept that invitation without
   delay. Wait for nothing. Wait for nobody. Who can tell that you may not
   wait for "a convenient season" till it be too late? The hand of a
   living Redeemer is now held out from heaven; but it may be withdrawn.
   The Fountain is open now; but it may soon be closed for ever. "If any
   man thirst, let him come and drink" without delay. Though you have been
   a great sinner, and have resisted warnings, counsel, and sermons, yet
   come.--Though you have sinned against light and knowledge, against a
   father's advice, and a mother's tears, though you have lived for years
   without a Sabbath, and without prayer, yet come.--Say not that you know
   not how to come, that you do not understand what it is to believe, that
   you must wait for more light. Will a tired man say that he is too tired
   to lie down? or a drowning man, that he knows not how to lay hold on
   the hand stretched out to help him? or the shipwrecked sailor, with a
   life-boat alongside the stranded hulk, that he knows not how to jump
   in? Oh, cast away these vain excuses! Arise, and come! The door is not
   shut. The fountain is not yet closed. The Lord Jesus invites you. It is
   enough that you feel thirsting, and desire to be saved. Come: come to
   Christ without delay. Who ever came to the fountain for sin and found
   it dry? Who ever went unsatisfied away?

   (3) But have you come to Christ already, and found relief? Then come
   nearer, nearer still. The closer your communion with Christ, the more
   comfort you will feel. The more you daily live by the side of the
   Fountain, the more you shall feel in yourself "a well of water
   springing up into everlasting life." (John iv. 14.) You shall not only
   be blessed yourself, but be a source of blessing to others.

   In this evil world you may not perhaps feel all the sensible comfort
   you could desire. But remember you cannot have two heavens. Perfect
   happiness is yet to come. The devil is not yet bound. There is "a good
   time coming" for all who feel their sins and come to Christ, and commit
   their thirsting souls to His keeping. When He comes again they will be
   completely satisfied. They will remember all the way by which they were
   led, and see the need-be of everything that befell them. Above all,
   they will wonder that they could ever live so long without Christ, and
   hesitate about coming to Him.

   There is a pass in Scotland called Glencroe, which supplies a beautiful
   illustration of what heaven will be to the souls who come to Christ.
   The road through Glencroe carries the traveller up a long and steep
   ascent, with many a little turn and winding in its course. But when the
   top of the pass is reached, a stone is seen by the wayside with these
   simple words inscribed upon it:--"Rest, and be thankful." Those words
   describe the feelings with which every thirsting one who comes to
   Christ will enter heaven. The summit of the narrow way will at length
   be ours. We shall cease from our weary journeyings, and sit down in the
   kingdom of God. We shall look back on all the way of our lives with
   thankfulness, and see the perfect wisdom of every step in the steep
   ascent by which we were led. We shall forget the toil of the upward
   journey in the glorious rest. Here, in this world, our sense of rest in
   Christ at best is feeble and partial: we hardly seem at times to taste
   fully "the living water." But when that which is perfect is come, then
   that which is imperfect shall be done away. "When we awake up after His
   likeness we shall be satisfied." (Psalm xvii. 15.) We shall drink out
   of the river of His pleasures and thirst no more.

  NOTE

   THERE is a passage in an old writer which throws so much light on some
   points mentioned in this paper, that I make no excuse for giving it to
   the reader in its entirety. It comes from a work which is little known
   and less read. It has done me good, and I think it may do good to
   others.

   "When a man is awakened, and brought to that that all must be brought
   to, or to worse, What shall I do to be saved?' (Acts xvi. 30, 31), we
   have the apostolic answer to it: Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
   thou shalt be saved, and thy house.' This answer is so old that with
   many it seems out of date. But it is still and will ever be fresh, and
   new, and savoury, and the only resolution of this grand case of
   conscience, as long as conscience and the world lasts. No wit or art of
   man will ever find a crack or flaw in it, or devise another or a better
   answer; nor can any but this alone heal rightly the wound of an
   awakened conscience.

   "Let us set this man to seek resolution and relief in this case of some
   masters in our Israel. According to their principles they must say to
   him, Repent, and mourn for your known sins, and leave them and loath
   them; and God will have mercy on you.' Alas!' (saith the poor man), my
   heart is hard, and I cannot repent aright: yea, I find my heart more
   hard and vile than when I was secure in sin.' If you speak to this man
   of qualifications for Christ, he knows nothing of them; if of sincere
   obedience, his answer is native and ready: Obedience is the work of a
   living man, and sincerity is only in a renewed soul.' Sincere obedience
   is, therefore, as impossible to a dead unrenewed sinner as perfect
   obedience is. Why should not the right answer be given to the awakened
   sinner: Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved'? Tell
   him what Christ is, what He hath done and suffered to obtain eternal
   redemption for sinners, and that according to the will of God and His
   Father. Give him a plain downright narrative of the Gospel salvation
   wrought out by the Son of God; tell him the history and mystery of the
   Gospel plainly. It may be the Holy Ghost will work faith thereby, as He
   did m those first fruits of the Gentiles. (Acts x. 44.)

   "If he ask, What warrant he hath to believe on Jesus Christ? tell him
   that he hath utter indispensable necessity for it; for without
   believing on Him, he must perish eternally. Tell him that he hath God's
   gracious offer of Christ and all His redemption; with a promise, that
   upon accepting the offer by faith, Christ and salvation with Him is
   his. Tell him that he hath God's express commandment (1 John iii. 23)
   to believe on Christ's name; and that he should make conscience of
   obeying it, as well as any command in the moral law. Tell him of
   Christ's ability and good-will to save; that no man was ever rejected
   by Him that cast himself upon Him; that desperate cases are the
   glorious triumphs of His art of saving. Tell him that there is no midst
   (or medium) between faith and unbelief; that there is no excuse for
   neglecting the one and continuing in the other; that believing on the
   Lord Jesus for salvation is more pleasing to God than all obedience to
   His law; and that unbelief is the most provoking to God, and the most
   damning to man, of all sins. Against the greatness of his sins, the
   curse of the law, and the severity of God as Judge, there is no relief
   to be held forth to him, but the free and boundless grace of God in the
   merit of Christ's satisfaction by the sacrifice of Himself.

   "If he should say, What is it to believe on Jesus Christ? As to this, I
   find no such question in the Word; but that all did some way understand
   the notion of it: the Jews that did not believe on Him (John vi.
   28-30); the chief priests and Pharisees (John vii. 48); the blind man.
   (John ix. 35.) When Christ asked him, Believest thou on the Son of God?
   he answered, Who is He, Lord, that I may believe on Him? Immediately,
   when Christ had told him (verse 37), he saith not, What is it to
   believe on Him? but, Lord, I believe; and worshipped Him: and so both
   professed and acted faith in Him. So the father of the lunatic (Mark
   ix. 23, 24) and the eunuch (Acts viii. 37), they all, both Christ's
   enemies and His disciples, knew that faith in Him was a believing that
   the Man Jesus of Nazareth was the Son of God, the Messiah, and Saviour
   of the world, so as to receive and look for salvation in His name.
   (Acts iv. 12.) This was the common report, published by Christ and His
   apostles and disciples, and known by all that heard it.

   "If he yet ask, What he is to believe? you tell him, that he is not
   called to believe that he is in Christ, and that his sins are pardoned,
   and he a justified man; but that he is to believe God's record
   concerning Christ, (1 John v. 10-12.) And this record is, that God
   giveth (that is, offereth) to us eternal Life in His Son Jesus Christ;
   and that all that with the heart believe this report, and rest their
   souls on these glad tidings, shall be saved. (Rom. x. 9-11.) And thus
   he is to believe, that he may be justified. (Gal. ii. 16.)

   "If he still say that this believing is hard, this is a good doubt, but
   easily resolved. It bespeaks a man deeply humbled. Anybody may see his
   own impotence to obey the law of God fully; but few find the difficulty
   of believing. For his relief and resolution ask him, What it is he
   finds makes believing difficult to him? Is it unwillingness to be
   justified and saved? Is it unwillingness to be so saved by Jesus
   Christ, to the praise of God's grace in Him, and to the voiding of all
   boasting in himself? This he will surely deny. Is it a distrust of the
   truth of the Gospel record? This he dare not own. Is it a doubt of
   Christ's ability or good-will to save? This is to contradict the
   testimony of God in the Gospel. Is it because he doubts of an interest
   in Christ and His redemption? You tell him that believing on Christ
   makes up the interest in Him.

   "If he say that he cannot believe on Jesus Christ because of the
   difficulty of the acting this faith, and that a Divine power is needful
   to draw it forth, which he finds not, you must tell him that believing
   in Jesus Christ is no work, but a resting on Jesus Christ. You must
   tell him that this pretence is as unreasonable as if a man, wearied
   with a journey and not able to go one step further, should argue, I am
   so tired, that I am not able to lie down,' when indeed he can neither
   stand nor go. The poor wearied sinner can never believe on Jesus Christ
   till he finds he can do nothing for himself; and in his first believing
   doth always apply himself to Christ for salvation, as a man hopeless
   and helpless in himself. And by such reasonings with him from the
   Gospel, the Lord will (as He hath often done) convey faith, and joy and
   peace by believing."--Robert Traill's works, 1696. Vol. I, 266-269.
     __________________________________________________________________

XVIII.
"UNSEARCHABLE RICHES"

   "Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace
   given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches
   of Christ." Ephesians iii. 8.

   IF we heard that sentence read for the first time, I think we should
   all feel it was a very remarkable one, even though we did not know by
   whom it was written. It is remarkable on account of the bold and
   striking figures of speech which it contains. "Less than the least of
   all saints;"--"Unsearchable riches of Christ;"--these are indeed
   "thoughts that breathe and words that burn."

   But the sentence is doubly remarkable when we consider the man who
   wrote it. The writer was none other than the great Apostle of the
   Gentiles, St. Paul--the leader of that noble little Jewish army which
   went forth from Palestine nineteen centuries ago, and turned the world
   upside down--that good soldier of Christ who left a deeper mark on
   mankind than any born of woman, except his sinless Master--a mark which
   abides to this very day. Surely such a sentence from the pen of such a
   man demands peculiar attention.

   Let us fix our eyes steadily on this text, and notice in it three
   things:--

   I. First, what St. Paul says of himself. He says, "I am less than the
   least of all saints."

   II. Secondly, what St. Paul says of his ministerial office. He says,
   "Grace is given unto me to preach."

   III. Thirdly, what St. Paul says of the great subject of his preaching.
   He calls it "the unsearchable riches of Christ."

   I trust that a few words on each of these three points may help to
   fasten down the whole text in memories, consciences, hearts, and minds.

   I. In the first place, let us notice what St. Paul says of himself.

   The language he uses is singularly strong. The founder of famous
   Churches, the writer of fourteen inspired epistles, the man who was
   "not behind the very chiefest apostles," "in labours more abundant, in
   stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft,"--the
   man who "spent and was spent" for souls, and "counted all things but
   loss for Christ,"--the man who could truly say, "To me to live is
   Christ, and to die is gain,"--what do we find him saying of himself? He
   employs an emphatic comparative and superlative. He says, "I am less
   than the least of all saints." What a poor creature is the least saint!
   Yet St. Paul says, "I am less than that man."

   Such language as this, I suspect, is almost unintelligible to many who
   profess and call themselves Christians. Ignorant alike of the Bible and
   their own hearts, they cannot understand what a saint means when he
   speaks so humbly of himself and his attainments. "It is a mere fashion
   of speaking," they will tell you; "it can only mean what St. Paul used
   to be, when he was a novice, and first began to serve Christ." So true
   it is that "the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of
   God." (1 Cor. ii. 14.) The prayers, the praises, the conflicts, the
   fears, the hopes, the joys, the sorrows of the true Christian, the
   whole experience of the seventh of Romans--all, all are "foolishness"
   to the man of the world. Just as the blind man is no judge of a
   Reynolds, or a Gainsborough, and the deaf cannot appreciate Handel's
   Messiah, so the unconverted man cannot fully understand an apostle's
   lowly estimate of himself.

   But we may rest assured that what St. Paul wrote with his pen, he
   testily felt in his heart. The language of our text does not stand
   alone. It is even exceeded in other places. To the Philippians he says,
   "I have not attained, nor am I already perfect: I follow after." To the
   Corinthians he says, "I am the least of the apostles, which am not meet
   to be called an apostle." To Timothy he says, "I am chief of sinners."
   To the Romans he cries, "Wretched man that I am I who shall deliver me
   from the body of this death?" (Phil. iii. 12; 1 Cor. xv. 9; 1 Tim. i.
   15; Rom. vii. 24.) The plain truth is that St. Paul saw in his own
   heart of hearts far more defects and infirmities than he saw in anyone
   else. The eyes of his understanding were so fully opened by the Holy
   Spirit of God that he detected a hundred things wrong in himself which
   the dull eyes of other men never observed at all. In short, possessing
   great spiritual light, he had great insight into his own natural
   corruption, and was clothed from head to foot with humility, (1 Peter
   v. 5.)

   Now let us clearly understand that humility like St. Paul's was not a
   peculiar characteristic of the great apostle of the Gentiles. On the
   contrary, it is one leading mark of all the most eminent saints of God
   in every age. The more real grace men have in their hearts, the deeper
   is their sense of sin. The more light the Holy Ghost pours into their
   souls, the more do they discern their own infirmities, defilements, and
   darkness. The dead soul feels and sees nothing; with life comes clear
   vision, a tender conscience and spiritual sensibility. Observe what
   lowly expressions Abraham, and Jacob, and Job, and David, and John the
   Baptist, used about themselves. Study the biographies of modern saints
   like Bradford, and Hooker, and George Herbert, and Beveridge, and
   Baxter, and McCheyne. Mark how one common feature of character belongs
   to them all--a very deep sense of sin.

   Superficial and shallow professors in the warmth of their first love
   may talk, if they will, of perfection. The great saints, in every era
   of Church history, from St. Paul down to this day, have always been
   "clothed with humility."

   He that desires to be saved, among the readers of this paper, let him
   know this day that the first steps towards heaven are a deep sense of
   sin and a lowly estimate of ourselves. Let him cast away that weak and
   silly tradition that the beginning of religion is to feel ourselves
   "good" Let him rather grasp that grand Scriptural principle, that we
   must begin by feeling "bad"; and that until we really feel "bad" we
   know nothing of true goodness or saving Christianity. Happy is he who
   has learned to draw near to God with the prayer of the publican, "God
   be merciful to me a sinner." (Luke xviii. 13.)

   Let us all seek humility. No grace suits man so well What are we that
   we should be proud? Of all creatures born into the world, none is so
   dependent as the child of Adam. Physically looked at, what body
   requires such care and attention, and is such a daily debtor to half
   creation for food and clothing, as the body of man? Mentally looked at,
   how little do the wisest men know (and they are but few), and how
   ignorant the vast majority of mankind are, and what misery do they
   create by their own folly! "We are but of yesterday," says the book of
   Job, "and know nothing." (Job viii. 9.) Surely there is no created
   being on earth or in heaven that ought to be so humble as man.

   Let us seek humility. There is no grace which so befits an English
   churchman. Our matchless Prayer-book, from first to last, puts the
   humblest language into the mouths of all who use it. The sentences at
   the beginning of morning and evening prayer, the General Confession,
   the Litany, the Communion Service--all, all are replete with
   lowly-minded and self-abasing expressions. All, with one harmonious
   voice, supply Church of England worshippers with clear teaching about
   our right position in the sight of God.

   Let us all seek more humility, if we know anything of it now. The more
   we have of it, the more Christlike we shall be. It is written of our
   blessed Master (though in Him there was no sin) that "being in the form
   of God He thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made Himself
   of no reputation, and took upon Him the form of a servant, and was made
   in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled
   Himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross."
   (Phil. ii. 6-8.) And let us remember the words which precede that
   passage "Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus."
   Depend on it, the nearer men draw to heaven, the more humble do they
   become. In the hour of death, with one foot in the grave, with
   something of the light of heaven shining down upon them, hundreds of
   great saints and Church dignitaries--such men as Selden, Bishop Butler,
   Archbishop Longley--have left on record their confession, that never
   till that hour did they see their sins so clearly and feel so deeply
   their debt to mercy and grace. Heaven alone, I suppose, will fully
   teach us how humble we ought to be. Then only, when we stand within the
   veil, and look back on all the way of life by which we were led, then
   only shall we completely understand the need and beauty of humility.
   Strong language like St. Paul's will not appear to us too strong in
   that day. No: indeed! We shall cast our crowns before the throne, and
   realize what a great divine meant when he said, "The anthem in heaven
   will be, What hath God wrought."

   II. In the second place, let us notice what St. Paul says of his
   ministerial office.

   There is a grand simplicity in the Apostle's words about this subject.
   He says, "Grace is given unto me that I should preach." The meaning of
   the sentence is plain: "To me is granted the privilege of being a
   messenger of good news. I have been commissioned to be a herald of glad
   tidings."--Of course we cannot doubt that St. Paul's conception of the
   minister's office included the administration of the sacraments, and
   the doing all other things needful for the edifying of the body of
   Christ. But here, as in other places, it is evident that the leading
   idea continually before his mind was that the chief business of a
   minister of the New Testament is to be a preacher, an evangelist, God's
   ambassador, God's messenger, and the proclaimer of God's good news to a
   fallen world. He says in another place, "Christ sent me not to baptize,
   but to preach the Gospel." (1 Cor. i. 17.)

   I fail to see that St. Paul ever supports the favourite theory that
   there was intended to be a sacerdotal ministry, a sacrificing
   priesthood in the Church of Christ. There is not a word in the Acts or
   in his Epistles to the Churches to warrant such a notion. It is nowhere
   written, "God hath set some in the Church, first apostles, then
   priests." (1 Cor. xii. 28.) There is a conspicuous absence of the
   theory in the Pastoral Epistles to Timothy and Titus, where, if
   anywhere, we might have expected to find it. On the contrary, in these
   very Epistles, we read such expressions as these, "God hath manifested
   His Word through preaching," "I am appointed a preacher." "I am
   ordained a preacher." "That by me the preaching might be fully known."
   (1 Tim. ii. 7; 2 Tim. i. 11; 2 Tim. iv. 17; Tit. i. 3.) And, to crown
   all, one of his last injunctions to his friend Timothy, when he leaves
   him in charge of an organized Church, is this pithy sentence, "Preach
   the Word." (2 Tim. iv. 2.) In short, I believe St. Paul would have us
   understand that, however various the works for which the Christian
   minister is set apart, his first, foremost, and principal work is to be
   the preacher and proclaimer of God's Word.

   But, while we refuse to allow that a sacrificing priesthood has any
   warrant of Scripture, let us beware in these days that we do not rush
   into the extreme of undervaluing the office which the minister of
   Christ holds. There is some danger in this direction. Let us grasp
   firmly certain fixed principles about the Christian ministry, and,
   however strong our dislike of priesthood and aversion to Romanism, let
   nothing tempt us to let these principles slip out of our hands. Surely
   there is solid middle ground between a grovelling idolatry of
   sacerdotalism on one hand, and a disorderly anarchy on the other.
   Surely it does not follow, because we will not be Papists in this
   matter of the ministry, that we must needs be Quakers or Plymouth
   Brethren. [47] This, at any rate, was not in the mind of St. Paul.

   (a) For one thing, let us settle it firmly in our minds that the
   ministerial office is a Scriptural Institution. I need not weary you
   with quotations to prove this point. I will simply advise you to read
   the Epistles to Timothy and Titus and judge for yourselves. If these
   Epistles do not authorize a ministry, there is, to my mind, no meaning
   in words. Take a jury of the first twelve intelligent, honest,
   disinterested, unprejudiced men you can find, and set them down with a
   New Testament to examine this question by them selves: "Is the
   Christian ministry a Scriptural thing or not?" I have no doubt what
   their verdict would be.

   (b) For another thing, let us settle it in our minds that the
   ministerial office is a most wise and useful provision of God. It
   secures the regular maintenance of all Christ's ordinances and means of
   grace. It provides an undying machinery for promoting the awakening of
   sinners and the edification of saints. All experience proves that
   everybody's business soon becomes nobody's business; and if this is
   true in other matters, it is no less true in the matter of religion.
   Our God is a God of order, and a God who works by means, and we have no
   right to expect His cause to be kept up by constant miraculous
   interpositions, while His servants stand idle. For the uninterrupted
   preaching of the Word and administration of the sacraments, no better
   plan can be devised than the appointment of a regular order of men who
   shall give themselves wholly to Christ's business.

   (c) For another thing, let us settle it firmly in our minds that the
   ministerial office is an honourable privilege. It is an honour to be
   the Ambassador of a King: the very person of such an officer of state
   is respected, and called legally sacred. It is an honour to bear the
   tidings of a victory such as Trafalgar and Waterloo: before the
   invention of telegraphs it was a highly coveted distinction. But how
   much greater honour is it to be the ambassador of the King of kings,
   and to proclaim the good news of the conquest achieved on Calvary! To
   serve directly such a Master, to carry such a message, to know that the
   results of our work, if God shall bless it, are eternal, this is indeed
   a privilege. Other labourers may work for a corruptible crown, but the
   minister of Christ for an incorruptible. Never is a land in worse
   condition than when the ministers of religion have caused their office
   to be ridiculed and despised. It is a tremendous word in Malachi: "I
   have made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as
   ye have not kept my ways." (Malachi ii. 9.) But, whether men will hear
   or forbear, the office of a faithful ambassador is honourable. It was a
   fine saying of an old missionary on his death-bed, who died at the age
   of ninety-six, "The very best thing that a man can do is to preach the
   Gospel."

   Let me leave this branch of my subject with an earnest request that all
   who pray will never forget to make supplications and prayers and
   intercession for the ministers of Christ--that there never may be
   wanting a due supply of them at home and in the mission field--that
   they may be kept sound in the faith and holy in their lives, and that
   they make take heed to themselves as well as to the doctrine. (1 Tim.
   iv. 16.)

   Oh, remember that while our office is honourable, useful, and
   Scriptural, it is also one of deep and painful responsibility! We watch
   for souls "as those who must give account" at the judgment day. (Heb.
   xiii. 17.) If souls are lost through unfaithfulness, their blood will
   be required at our hands. If we had only to read services and
   administer sacraments, to wear a peculiar dress and go through a round
   of ceremonies, and bodily exercises, and gestures, and postures, our
   position would be comparatively light. But this is not all. We have got
   to deliver our Master's message--to keep back nothing that is
   profitable--to declare all the counsel of God. If we tell our
   congregations less than the truth or more than the truth, we may ruin
   for ever immortal souls. Life and death are in the power of the
   preacher's tongue. "Woe is unto us if we preach not the Gospel!" (1
   Cor. ix. 16.)

   Once more I say, Pray for us. Who is sufficient for these things?
   Remember the old saying of the Fathers: "None are in more spiritual
   danger than ministers." It is easy to criticise and find fault with us.
   We have a treasure in earthen vessels. We are men of like passions with
   yourselves, and not infallible. Pray for us in these trying, tempting,
   controversial days, that our Church may never lack bishops, priests,
   and deacons who are sound in the faith, bold as lions, "wise as
   serpents, and yet harmless as doves." (Matt. x. 16.) The very man who
   said "Grace is given me to preach," is the same man who said, in
   another place, "Pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have free
   course, and be glorified, and that we may be delivered from
   unreasonable and wicked men: for all men have not faith." (2 Thess.
   iii. 1, 2.)

   III. Let us now notice, in the last place, what St. Paul says of the
   great subject of his preaching. He calls it "the unsearchable riches of
   Christ."

   That the converted man of Tarsus should preach "Christ" is no more than
   we might expect from his antecedents. Having found peace through the
   blood of the cross himself, we may be sure he would always tell the
   story of the cross to others. He never wasted precious time in exalting
   a mere rootless morality, in descanting on vague abstractions and empty
   platitudes--such as "the true," and "the noble," and "the earnest," and
   "the beautiful," and "the germs of goodness in human nature," and the
   like. He always went to the root of the matter, and showed men their
   great family disease, their desperate state as sinners, and the Great
   Physician needed by a sin-sick world.

   That he should preach Christ among "the Gentiles" again, is in keeping
   with all we know of his line of action in all places and among all
   people. Wherever he travelled and stood up to preach --at Antioch, at
   Lystra, at Philippi, at Athens, at Corinth, at Ephesus, among Greeks or
   Romans, among learned or unlearned, among Stoics and Epicureans, before
   rich or poor, barbarians, Scythians, bond, or free--Jesus and His
   vicarious death, Jesus and His resurrection, was the keynote of his
   sermons. Varying his mode of address according to his audience, as he
   wisely did, the pith and heart of his preaching was Christ crucified.

   But in the text before us, you will observe, he uses a very peculiar
   expression, an expression which unquestionably stands alone in his
   writings--"the unsearchable riches of Christ" It is the strong, burning
   language of one who always remembered his debt to Christ's mercy and
   grace, and loved to show how intensely he felt it by his words. St.
   Paul was not a man to act or speak by halves. (Quicquid fecit vald�
   fecit.) He never forgot the road to Damascus, the house of Judas in the
   street called Strait, the visit of good Ananias, the scales falling
   from his eyes, and his own marvellous passage from death to life. These
   things are always fresh and green before his mind; and so he is not
   content to say, "Grace is given me to preach Christ." No: he amplifies
   his subject. He calls it "the unsearchable riches of Christ."

   But what did the Apostle mean when he spoke of "unsearchable riches"?
   This is a hard question to answer. No doubt he saw in Christ such a
   boundless provision for all the wants of man's soul that he knew no
   other phrase to convey his meaning. From whatever standpoint he beheld
   Jesus, he saw in Him far more than mind could conceive, or tongue could
   tell. What he precisely intended must necessarily be matter of
   conjecture. But it may be useful to set down in detail some of the
   things which most probably were in his mind. It may, it must, it ought
   to be useful. For after all, let us remember, these "riches of Christ"
   are riches which you and I need in England just as much as St. Paul;
   and, best of all, these "riches" are treasured up in Christ for you and
   me as much as they were 1900 years ago. They are still there. They are
   still offered freely to all who are willing to have them. They are
   still the property of everyone who repents and believes. Let us glance
   briefly at some of them.

   (a) Set down, first and foremost, in your minds that there are
   unsearchable riches in Christ's person. That miraculous union of
   perfect Man and perfect God in our Lord Jesus Christ is a great
   mystery, no doubt, which we have no line to fathom. It is a high thing;
   and we cannot attain to it. But, mysterious as that union may be, it is
   a mine of comfort and consolation to all who can rightly regard it.
   Infinite power and infinite sympathy are met together and combined m
   our Saviour. If He had been only Man He could not have saved us. If He
   had been only God (I speak with reverence) He could not have been
   "touched with the feeling of our infirmities," nor "suffered Himself
   being tempted." (Heb. ii. 18; iv. 15.) As God, He is mighty to save;
   and as Man, He is exactly suited to be our Head, Representative, and
   Friend. Let those who never think deeply, taunt us, if they will, with
   squabbling about creeds and dogmatic theology. But let thoughtful
   Christians never be ashamed to believe and hold fast the neglected
   doctrine of the Incarnation, and the union of two natures in our
   Saviour. It is a rich and precious truth that our Lord Jesus Christ is
   both "God and Man."

   (b) Set down, next, in your minds that there are unsearchable riches in
   the work which Christ accomplished for us, when He lived on earth,
   died, and rose again. Truly and indeed, "He finished the work which His
   Father gave Him to do." (John xvii. 4)--the work of atonement for sin,
   the work of reconciliation, the work of redemption, the work of
   satisfaction, the work of substitution as "the just for the unjust." It
   pleases some men, I know, to call these short phrases "man-made
   theological terms, human dogmas," and the like. But they will find it
   hard to prove that each of these much-abused phrases does not honestly
   contain the substance of plain texts of Scripture; which, for
   convenience sake, like the word Trinity, divines have packed into a
   single word. And each phrase is very rich.

   (c) Set down, next, in your minds that there are unsearchable riches in
   the offices which Christ at this moment fills, as He lives for us at
   the right hand of God. He is at once our Mediator, our Advocate, our
   Priest, our Intercessor, our Shepherd, our Bishop, our Physician, our
   Captain, our King, our Master, our Head, our Forerunner, our Elder
   Brother, the Bridegroom of our souls. No doubt these offices are
   worthless to those who know nothing of vital religion. But to those who
   live the life of faith, and seek first the kingdom of God, each office
   is precious as gold.

   (d) Set down, next, in your minds that there are unsearchable riches in
   the names and titles which are applied to Christ in the Scriptures.
   Their number is very great, every careful Bible-reader knows, and I
   cannot of course pretend to do more than select a few of them. Think
   for a moment of such titles as the Lamb of God--the bread of life--the
   fountain of living waters--the light of the world--the door--the
   way--the vine--the rock--the corner stone--the Christian's robe--the
   Christian's altar. Think of all these names, I say, and consider how
   much they contain. To the careless, worldly man they are mere "words,"
   and nothing more; but to the true Christian each title, if beaten out
   and developed, will be found to have within its bosom a wealth of
   blessed truth.

   (e) Set down, lastly, in your minds that there are unsearchable riches
   in the characteristic qualities, attributes, dispositions, and
   intentions of Christ's mind towards man, as we find them revealed in
   the New Testament. In Him there are riches of mercy, love, and com
   passion for sinners--riches of power to cleanse, pardon, forgive, and
   to save to the uttermost--riches of willingness to receive all who come
   to Him repenting and believing--riches of ability to change by His
   Spirit the hardest hearts and worst characters--riches of tender
   patience to bear with the weakest believer--riches of strength to help
   His people to the end, notwithstanding every foe without and
   within--riches of sympathy for all who are cast down and bring their
   troubles to Him--and last, but not least, riches of glory to reward,
   when He comes again to raise the dead and gather His people to be with
   Him in His kingdom. Who can estimate these riches? The children of this
   world may regard them with indifference, or turn away from them with
   disdain; but those who feel the value of their souls know better. They
   will say with one voice, "There are no riches like those which are laid
   up in Christ for His people."

   For, best of all, these riches are unsearchable. They are a mine which,
   however long it may be worked, is never exhausted. They are a fountain
   which, however many draw its waters, never runs dry. The sun in heaven
   has been shining for thousands of years, and giving light, and life,
   and warmth, and fertility to the whole surface of the globe. There is
   not a tree or a flower in Europe, Asia, Africa, or America which is not
   a debtor to the sun. And still the sun shines on for generation after
   generation, and season after season, rising and setting with unbroken
   regularity, giving to all, taking from none, and to all ordinary eyes
   the same in light and heat that it was in the day of creation, the
   great common benefactor of mankind. Just so it is, if any illustration
   can approach the reality, just so it is with Christ. He is still "the
   Sun of righteousness" to all mankind. (Malachi iv. 2.) Millions have
   drawn from Him in days gone by, and looking to Him have lived with
   comfort, and with comfort died. Myriads at this moment are drawing from
   Him daily supplies of mercy, grace, peace, strength, and help, and find
   "all fulness" dwelling in Him. And yet the half of the riches laid up
   in Him for mankind, I doubt not, is utterly unknown! Surely the Apostle
   might well use that phrase, "the unsearchable riches of Christ."

   Let me now conclude this paper with three words of practical
   application. For convenience sake I shall put them in the form of
   questions, and I invite each reader of this volume to examine them
   quietly and try to give them an answer.

   (1) First, then, let me ask you what you think of yourself? What St.
   Paul thought of himself you have seen and heard. Now, what are your
   thoughts about yourself? Have you found out that grand foundation-truth
   that you are a sinner, a guilty sinner in the sight of God?

   The cry for more education in this day is loud and incessant. Ignorance
   is universally deplored. But, you may depend, there is no ignorance so
   common and so mischievous as ignorance of ourselves. Yes: men may know
   all arts, and sciences, and languages, and political economy, and
   state-craft, and yet be miserably ignorant of their own hearts and
   their own state before God.

   Be very sure that self-knowledge is the first step towards heaven. To
   know God's unspeakable perfection, and our own immense imperfection--to
   see our own unspeakable defectiveness and corruption, is the A B C in
   saving religion. The more real inward light we have, the more humble
   and lowly-minded we shall be, and the more we shall understand the
   value of that despised thing, the Gospel of Christ. He that thinks
   worst of himself and his own doings is perhaps the best Christian
   before God. Well would it be for many if they would pray, night and
   day, this simple prayer--"Lord, show me myself."

   (2) Secondly, what do you think of the ministers of Christ? Strange as
   that question may seem, I verily believe that the kind of answer a man
   would give to it, if he speaks honestly, is very often a fair test of
   the state of his heart.

   Observe, I am not asking what you think of an idle, worldly,
   inconsistent clergyman--a sleeping watchman and faithless shepherd. No!
   I ask what you think of the faithful minister of Christ, who honestly
   exposes sin, and pricks your conscience. Mind how you answer that
   question. Too many, nowadays, like only those ministers who prophesy
   smooth things and let their sins alone, who flatter their pride and
   amuse their intellectual taste, but who never sound an alarm, and never
   tell them of a wrath to come. When Ahab saw Elijah, he said, "Hast thou
   found me, O mine enemy?" (1 Kings xxi. 20.) When Micaiah was named to
   Ahab, he cried, "I hate him because he doth not prophesy good of me,
   but evil." (1 Kings xxii. 8.) Alas, there are many like Ahab in the
   nineteenth century! They like a ministry which does not make them
   uncomfortable, and send them home ill at ease. How is it with you? Oh,
   believe me, he is the best friend who tells you the most truth! It is
   an evil sign in the Church when Christ's witnesses are silenced, or
   persecuted, and men hate him who reproveth. (Isaiah xxix. 21.) It was a
   solemn saying of the prophet to Amaziah: "Now I know that God hath
   determined to destroy thee, because thou has done this, and not
   hearkened to my counsel." (2 Chron. xxv. 16.)

   (3) Last of all, what do you think of Christ Himself? Is He great or
   little in your eyes? Does He come first or second in your estimation?
   Is He before or behind His Church, His ministers, His sacraments, His
   ordinances? Where is He in your heart and your mind's eye?

   After all, this is the question of questions! Pardon, peace, rest of
   conscience, hope in death, heaven itself--all hinge upon our answer. To
   know Christ is life eternal. To be without Christ is to be without God.
   "He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of God
   hath not life." (1 John v. 12.) The friends of purely secular
   education, the enthusiastic advocates of reform and progress, the
   worshippers of reason, and intellect, and mind, and science, may say
   what they please, and do all they can to mend the world. But they will
   find their labour in vain if they do not make allowance for the fall of
   man, if there is no place for Christ in their schemes. There is a sore
   disease at the heart of mankind, which will baffle all their efforts,
   and defeat all their plans, and that disease is sin. Oh, that people
   would only see and recognize the corruption of human nature, and the
   uselessness of all efforts to improve man which are not based on the
   remedial system of the Gospel! Yes: the plague of sin is in the world,
   and no waters will ever heal that plague except those which flow from
   the fountain for all sin--a crucified Christ.

   But, to wind up all, where is boasting? As a great divine said on his
   death-bed, "We are all of us only half awake." The best Christian among
   us knows but little of his glorious Saviour, even after he had learned
   to believe. We see through a glass darkly. We do not realize the
   "unsearchable riches" there are in Him. When we wake up after His
   likeness in another world, we shall be amazed that we knew Him so
   imperfectly, and loved Him so little Let us seek to know Him better
   now, and live in closer communion with Him. So living, we shall feel no
   need of human priests and earthly confessionals. We shall feel "I have
   all and abound: I want nothing more. Christ dying for me on the
   cross--Christ ever interceding for me at God's right hand--Christ
   dwelling in my heart by faith--Christ soon coming again to gather me
   and all His people together to part no more, Christ is enough for me.
   Having Christ, I have unsearchable riches.'"


   "The good I have is from His stores supplied,

   The ill is only what He deems the best;

   He for my Friend, I'm rich with nought beside,

   And poor without Him, though of all possess'd:

   Changes may come, I take or I resign,

   Content while I am His, and He is mine.


   "While here, alas! I know but half His love,

   But half discern Him, and but half adore;

   But when I meet Him in the realms above,

   I hope to love Him better, praise Him more,

   And feel, and tell, amid the choir divine,

   How fully I am His, and He is mine."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [47] Every well-informed person knows that, to the apprehension of most
   people, the Quakers and Plymouth Brethren appear to ignore the
   ministerial office altogether.
     __________________________________________________________________

XIX.
WANTS OF THE TIMES

   Men that had understanding of the times."--1 Chronicles xii. 32.

   THESE words were written about the tribe of Issachar, in the days when
   David first began to reign over Israel. It seems that after Saul's
   unhappy death, some of the tribes of Israel were undecided what to do.
   "Under which king?" was the question of the day in Palestine. Men
   doubted whether they should cling to the family of Saul, or accept
   David as their king. Some hung back, and would not commit themselves;
   others came forward boldly, and declared for David. Among these last
   were many of the children of Issachar; and the Holy Ghost gives them a
   special word of praise. He says, "They were men that had understanding
   of the times."

   I cannot doubt that this sentence, like every sentence in Scripture,
   was written for our learning. These men of Issachar are set before us
   as a pattern to be imitated and an example to be followed; for it is a
   most important thing to understand the times in which we live, and to
   know what those times require. The wise men in the court of Ahasuerus
   "knew the times." (Esther i. 13.) Our Lord Jesus Christ blames the Jews
   because they "knew not the time of their visitation," and did not
   "discern the signs of the times." (Matt. xvi. 3; Luke xix. 44.) Let us
   take heed lest we fall into the same sin. The man who is content to sit
   ignorantly by his own fireside, wrapped up in his own private affairs,
   and has no public eye for what is going on in the Church and the world,
   is a miserable patriot, and a poor style of Christian. Next to our
   Bibles and our own hearts, our Lord would have us study our own times.

   Now I propose in this paper to consider what our own times require at
   our hands. All ages have their own peculiar dangers for professing
   Christians, and all consequently demand special attention to peculiar
   duties. I ask my readers to give me their minds for a few minutes while
   I try to show them what the times require of English Christians, and
   particularly of English Churchmen. There are five points which I
   propose to bring before you, and I shall speak of them plainly and
   without reserve. "If the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall
   prepare himself to the battle?" (1 Cor. xiv. 8.)

   I. First and foremost, the times require of us a bold and unflinching
   maintenance of the entire truth of Christianity, and the Divine
   authority of the Bible.

   Our lot is cast in an age of abounding unbelief, scepticism, and, I
   fear I must add, infidelity. Never, perhaps, since the days of Celsus,
   Porphyry, and Julian, was the truth of revealed religion so openly and
   unblushingly assailed, and never was the assault so speciously and
   plausibly conducted. The words which Bishop Butler wrote in 1736 are
   curiously applicable to our own days:--"It is come to be taken for
   granted by many persons, that Christianity is not even a subject of
   inquiry; but that it is now at length discovered to be fictitious. And
   accordingly they treat it as if, in the present age, this was an agreed
   point among all people of discernment, and nothing remained but to set
   it up as a principal subject of mirth and ridicule, as it were by way
   of reprisals for its having so long interrupted the pleasures of the
   world." (Butter's Analogy, Introduction.) I often wonder what the good
   Bishop would have now said, if he had lived in the present day.

   In reviews, magazines, newspapers, lectures, essays, and sometimes even
   in sermons, scores of clever writers are incessantly waging war against
   the very foundations of Christianity. Reason, science, geology,
   anthropology, modern discoveries, free thought, are all boldly asserted
   to be on their side. No educated person, we are constantly told
   nowadays, can really believe supernatural religion, or the plenary
   inspiration of the Bible, or the possibility of miracles. Such ancient
   doctrines as the Trinity, the deity of Christ, the personality of the
   Holy Spirit, the atonement, the obligation of the Sabbath, the
   necessity and efficacy of prayer, the existence of the devil, and the
   reality of future punishment, are quietly put on the shelf as useless
   old Almanacs, or contemptuously thrown overboard as lumber! And all
   this is done so cleverly, and with such an appearance of candour and
   liberality, and with such compliments to the capacity and nobility of
   human nature, that multitudes of unstable Christians are carried away
   as by a flood, and become partially unsettled, if they do not make
   complete shipwreck of faith.

   The existence of this plague of unbelief must not surprise us for a
   moment. It is only an old enemy in a new dress, an old disease in a new
   form. Since the day when Adam and Eve fell, the devil has never ceased
   to tempt men not to believe God, and has said, directly or indirectly,
   "Ye shall not die even if you do not believe." In the latter days
   especially we have warrant of Scripture for expecting an abundant crop
   of unbelief:--"When the Son of man cometh, shall He find faith on the
   earth?"--"Evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse."--"There
   shall come in the last days scoffers." (Luke xviii. 8; 2 Tim. iii. 13;
   2 Peter iii. 3.) Here in England scepticism is that natural rebound
   from semi-popery and superstition, which many wise men have long
   predicted and expected. It is precisely that swing of the pendulum
   which far-sighted students of human nature looked for; and it has come.

   But as I tell you not to be surprised at the widespread scepticism of
   the times, so also I must urge you not to be shaken in mind by it, or
   moved from your steadfastness. There is no real cause for alarm. The
   ark of God is not in danger, though the oxen seem to shake it.
   Christianity has survived the attacks of Hume and Hobbes and Tindal--of
   Collins and Woolston and Bolingbroke and Chubb--of Voltaire and Payne
   and Holyoak. These men made a great noise in their day, and frightened
   weak people; but they produced no more effect than idle travellers
   produce by scratching their names on the great pyramid of Egypt. Depend
   on it, Christianity in like manner will survive the attacks of the
   clever writers of these times. The startling novelty of many modern
   objections to Revelation, no doubt, makes them seem more weighty than
   they really are. It does not follow, however, that hard knots cannot be
   untied because our fingers cannot untie them, or formidable
   difficulties cannot be explained because our eyes cannot see through or
   explain them. When you cannot answer a sceptic, be content to wait for
   more light; but never forsake a great principle. In religion, as in
   many scientific questions, said Faraday, "the highest philosophy is
   often a judicious suspense of judgment." He that believeth shall not
   make haste: he can afford to wait.

   When sceptics and infidels have said all they can, we must not forget
   that there are three great broad facts which they have never explained
   away; and I am convinced they never can, and never will. Let me tell
   you briefly what they are. They are very simple facts, and any plain
   man can understand them.

   (a) The first fact is Jesus Christ Himself. If Christianity is a mere
   invention of man, and the Bible is not from God, how can infidels
   explain Jesus Christ? His existence in history, they cannot deny. How
   is it that without force or bribery, without arms or money, He has made
   such an immensely deep mark on the world, as He certainly has? Who was
   He? What was He? Where did He come from? How is it that there never has
   been one like Him, neither before nor after, since the beginning of
   historical times? They cannot explain it. Nothing can explain it but
   the great foundation principle of revealed religion, that Jesus Christ
   is God, and His Gospel is all true.

   (b) The second fact is the Bible itself. If Christianity is a mere
   invention of man, and the Bible is of no more authority than any other
   uninspired volume, how is it that the Book is what it is? How is it
   that a Book written by a few Jews in a remote corner of the
   earth--written at distant periods without consort or collusion among
   the writers--written by members of a nation which, compared to Greeks
   and Romans, did nothing for literature--how is it that this Book stands
   entirely alone, and there is nothing that even approaches it, for high
   views of God, for true views of man, for solemnity of thought, for
   grandeur of doctrine, and for purity of morality? What account can the
   infidel give of this Book, so deep, so simple, so wise, so free from
   defects? He cannot explain its existence and nature on his principles.
   We only can do that who hold that the Book is Supernatural and of God.

   (c) The third fact is the effect which Christianity has produced on the
   world. If Christianity is a mere invention of man, and not a
   supernatural, Divine revelation, how is it that it has wrought such a
   complete alteration in the state of mankind? Any well-read man knows
   that the moral difference between the condition of the world, before
   Christianity was planted and since Christianity took root, is the
   difference between night and day, the kingdom of heaven and the kingdom
   of the devil. At this very moment, I defy anyone to look at the map of
   the world, and compare the countries where men are Christians with
   those where men are not Christians, and to deny that these countries
   are as different as light and darkness, black and white. How can any
   infidel explain this on his principles? He cannot do it. We only can
   who believe that Christianity came down from God, and is the only
   Divine religion in the world.

   Whenever you are tempted to be alarmed at the progress of infidelity,
   look at the three facts I have just mentioned, and cast your fears
   away. Take up your position boldly behind the ramparts of these three
   facts, and you may safely defy the utmost efforts of modern sceptics.
   They may often ask you a hundred questions you cannot answer, and start
   ingenious problems about various readings, or inspiration, or geology,
   or the origin of man, or the age of the world, which you cannot solve.
   They may vex and irritate you with wild speculations and theories, of
   which at the time you cannot prove the fallacy, though you feel it. But
   be calm and fear not. Remember the three great facts I have named, and
   boldly challenge sceptics to explain them. away. The difficulties of
   Christianity no doubt are great; but, depend on it, they are nothing
   compared to the difficulties of infidelity.

   II. In the second place, the times require at our hands distinct and
   decided views of Christian doctrine.

   I cannot withhold my conviction that the professing Church of the
   nineteenth century is as much damaged by laxity and indistinctness
   about matters of doctrine within, as it is by sceptics and unbelievers
   without. Myriads of professing Christians nowadays seem utterly unable
   to distinguish things that differ. Like people afflicted with
   colour-blindness, they are incapable of discerning what is true and
   what is false, what is sound and what is unsound. If a preacher of
   religion is only clever and eloquent and earnest, they appear to think
   he is all right, however strange and heterogeneous his sermons may be.
   They are destitute of spiritual sense, apparently, and cannot detect
   error. Popery or Protestantism, an atonement or no atonement, a
   personal Holy Ghost or no Holy Ghost, future punishment or no future
   punishment, High Church or Low Church or Broad Church, Trinitarianism,
   Arianism, or Unitarianism, nothing comes amiss to them: they can
   swallow it all, if they cannot digest it! Carried away by a fancied
   liberality and charity, they seem to think everybody is right and
   nobody is wrong, every clergyman is sound and none are unsound,
   everybody is going to be saved and nobody going to be lost. Their
   religion is made up of negatives; and the only positive thing about
   them is that they dislike distinctness and think all extreme and
   decided and positive views are very naughty and very wrong!

   These people live in a kind of mist or fog. They see nothing clearly,
   and do not know what they believe. They have not made up their minds
   about any great point in the Gospel, and seem content to be honorary
   members of all schools of thought. For their lives they could not tell
   you what they think is truth about justification, or regeneration, or
   sanctification, or the Lord's Supper, or baptism, or faith, or
   conversion, or inspiration, or the future state. They are eaten up with
   a morbid dread of controversy and an ignorant dislike of party spirit;
   and yet they really cannot define what they mean by these phrases. The
   only point you can make out is that they admire earnestness and
   cleverness and charity, and cannot believe that any clever, earnest,
   charitable man can ever be in the wrong! And so they live on undecided;
   and too often undecided they drift down to the grave, without comfort
   in their religion, and, I am afraid, often without hope.

   The explanation of this boneless, nerveless, jelly-fish condition of
   soul is not difficult to find. To begin with, the heart of man is
   naturally in the dark about religion--has no intuitive sense of
   truth--and really needs instruction and illumination. Besides this, the
   natural heart in most men hates exertion in religion, and cordially
   dislikes patient, painstaking inquiry. Above all, the natural heart
   generally likes the praise of others, shrinks from collision, and loves
   to be thought charitable and liberal. The whole result is that a kind
   of broad religious "agnosticism" just suits an immense number of
   people, and specially suits young persons. They are content to shovel
   aside all disputed points as rubbish, and if you charge them with
   indecision, they will tell you: "I do not pretend to understand
   controversy; I decline to examine controverted points. I daresay it is
   all the same in the long run."--Who does not know that such people
   swarm and abound everywhere?

   Now I do beseech all who read this paper to beware of this undecided
   state of mind in religion. It is a pestilence which walketh in
   darkness, and a destruction that killeth in noonday. It is a lazy, idle
   frame of soul which, doubtless, saves men the trouble of thought and
   investigation; but it is a frame of soul for which there is no warrant
   in the Bible, nor yet in the Articles or Prayer-book of the Church of
   England. For your own soul's sake, dare to make up your mind what you
   believe, and dare to have positive, distinct views of truth and error.
   Never, never be afraid to hold decided doctrinal opinions; and let no
   fear of man and no morbid dread of being thought party-spirited,
   narrow, or controversial, make you rest contented with a bloodless,
   boneless, tasteless, colourless, lukewarm, undogmatic Christianity.

   Mark what I say. If you want to do good in these times, you must throw
   aside indecision, and take up a distinct, sharply-cut, doctrinal
   religion. If you believe little, those to whom you try to do good will
   believe nothing. The victories of Christianity, wherever they have been
   won, have been won by distinct doctrinal theology; by telling men
   roundly of Christ's vicarious death and sacrifice; by showing them
   Christ's substitution on the cross, and His precious blood; by teaching
   them justification by faith, and bidding them believe on a crucified
   Saviour; by preaching ruin by sin, redemption by Christ, regeneration
   by the Spirit; by lifting up the brazen serpent; by telling men to look
   and five--to believe, repent, and be converted. This--this is the only
   teaching which for eighteen centuries God has honoured with success,
   and is honouring at the present day both at home and abroad. Let the
   clever advocates of a broad and undogmatic theology--the preachers of
   the Gospel of earnestness, and sincerity and cold morality--let them, I
   say, show us at this day any English village or parish, or city, or
   town, or district, which has been evangelized without "dogma," by their
   principles. They cannot do it, and they never will. Christianity
   without distinct doctrine is a powerless thing. It may be beautiful to
   some minds, but it is childless and barren. There is no getting over
   facts. The good that is done in the earth may be comparatively small.
   Evil may abound, and ignorant impatience may murmur and cry out that
   Christianity has failed. But, depend on it, if we want to "do good" and
   shake the world, we must fight with the old apostolic weapons, and
   stick to "dogma." No dogma, no fruits! No positive Evangelical
   doctrine, no evangelization!

   Mark once more what I say. The men who have done most for the Church of
   England, and made the deepest mark on their day and generation, have
   always been men of most decided and distinct doctrinal views. It is the
   bold, decided, outspoken man, like Capel Molyneux, or our grand old
   Protestant champion Hugh McNeile, who makes a deep impression, and sets
   people thinking, and "turns the world upside down." It was "dogma" in
   the apostolic ages which emptied the heathen temples and shook Greece
   and Rome. It was "dogma" which awoke Christendom from its slumbers at
   the time of the Reformation and spoiled the Pope of one third of his
   subjects. It was "dogma" which 100 years ago revived the Church of
   England in the days of Whitfield, Wesley, Venn, and Romaine, and blew
   up our dying Christianity into a burning flame. It is "dogma" at this
   moment which gives power to every successful mission, whether at home
   or abroad. It is doctrine--doctrine, clear, ringing doctrine--which,
   like the ram's horns at Jericho, casts down the opposition of the devil
   and sin. Let us cling to decided doctrinal views, whatever some may
   please to say in these times, and we shall do well for ourselves, well
   for others, well for the Church of England, and well for Christ's cause
   in the world.

   III. In the third place, the times require of us an awakened and
   livelier sense of the unscriptural and soul-ruining character of
   Romanism.

   This is a painful subject; but it imperatively demands some plain
   speaking.

   The facts of the case are very simple. No intelligent observer can fail
   to see that the tone of public feeling in England about Romanism has
   undergone a great change in the last forty years. Father Oakley, the
   well-known pervert, an ally of Cardinal Newman, asserts this
   triumphantly in a recent number of the Contemporary Review. And I am
   sorry to say that, in my judgment, he speaks the truth. There is no
   longer that general dislike, dread, and aversion to Popery, which was
   once almost universal in this realm. The edge of the old British
   feeling about Protestantism seems blunted and dull. Some profess to be
   tired of all religious controversy, and are ready to sacrifice God's
   truth for the sake of peace.--Some look on Romanism as simply one among
   many English forms of religion, and neither worse nor better than
   others.--Some try to persuade us that Romanism is changed, and not
   nearly so bad as it used to be.--Some boldly point to the faults of
   Protestants, and loudly cry that Romanists are quite as good as
   ourselves.--Some think it fine and liberal to maintain that we have no
   right to think anyone wrong who is in earnest about his creed.--And yet
   the two great historical facts, (a) that ignorance, immorality, and
   superstition reigned supreme in England 400 years ago under Popery, (b)
   that the Reformation was the greatest blessing God ever gave to this
   land--both these are facts which no one but a Papist ever thought of
   disputing fifty years ago! In the present day, alas, it is convenient
   and fashionable to forget them! In short, at the rate we are going, I
   shall not be surprised if it is soon proposed to repeal the Act of
   Settlement and to allow the Crown of England to be worn by a Papist.

   The causes of this melancholy change of feeling are not hard to
   discover.

   (a) It arises partly from the untiring zeal of the Romish Church
   herself. Her agents never slumber or sleep. They compass sea and land
   to make one proselyte. They creep in everywhere, like the Egyptian
   frogs, and leave no stone unturned, in the palace or the workhouse, to
   promote their cause, (b) It has been furthered immensely by the
   proceedings of the Ritualistic party in the Church of England. That
   energetic and active body has been vilifying the Reformation and
   sneering at Protestantism for many years, with only too much success.
   It has corrupted, leavened, blinded, and poisoned the minds of many
   Churchmen by incessant misrepresentation. It has gradually familiarized
   people with every distinctive doctrine and practice of Romanism--the
   real presence--the mass--auricular confession and priestly
   absolution--the sacerdotal character of the ministry--the monastic
   system--and a histrionic, sensuous, showy style of public worship--and
   the natural result is, that many simple people see no mighty harm in
   downright genuine Popery! Last, but not least, the spurious liberality
   of the ay we live in helps on the Romeward tendency. It is fashionable
   now to say that all sects should be equal--that the State should have
   nothing to do with religion--that all creeds should be regarded with
   equal favour and respect--and that there is a substratum of common
   truth at the bottom of all kinds of religion, whether Buddhism,
   Mohammedanism, or Christianity! The consequence is that myriads of
   ignorant folk begin to think there is nothing peculiarly dangerous in
   the tenets of Papists any more than in the tenets of Methodists,
   Independents, Presbyterians, or Baptists--and that we ought to let
   Romanism alone and never expose its unscriptural and
   Christ-dishonouring character.

   The consequences of this changed tone of feeling, I am bold to say,
   will be most disastrous and mischievous, unless it can be checked. Once
   let Popery get her foot again on the neck of England and there will be
   an end of all our national greatness. God will forsake us and we shall
   sink to the level of Portugal and Spain. With Bible-reading
   discouraged--with private judgment forbidden--with the way to Christ's
   cross narrowed or blocked up--with priest-craft re-established--with
   auricular confession set up in every parish--with monasteries and
   nunneries dotted over the land--with women everywhere kneeling like
   serfs and slaves at the feet of clergymen--with men casting off all
   faith, and becoming sceptics--with schools and colleges made seminaries
   of Jesuitism--with free thought denounced and anathematized--with all
   these things the distinctive manliness and independence of the British
   character will gradually dwindle, wither, pine away, and be destroyed;
   and England will be ruined. And all these things, I firmly believe,
   will come unless the old feeling about the value of Protestantism can
   be revived.

   I warn all who read this paper, and I warn my fellow-churchmen in
   particular, that the times require you to awake and be on your guard.
   Beware of Romanism and beware of any religious teaching which,
   wittingly or unwittingly, paves the way to it. I beseech you to realize
   the painful fact that the protestantism of this country is gradually
   ebbing away, and I entreat you, as Christians and patriots to resist
   the growing tendency to forget the blessings of the English
   Reformation.

   For Christ's sake, for the sake of the Church of England, for the sake
   of our country, for the sake of our children, let us not drift back to
   Romish ignorance, superstition, priestcraft, and immorality. Our
   fathers tried Popery long ago, for centuries, and threw it off at last
   with disgust and indignation. Let us not put the clock back and return
   to Egypt. Let us have no peace with Rome till Rome adjures her errors
   and is at peace with Christ. Till Rome does that, the vaunted re-union
   of Western Churches, which some talk of, and press upon our notice, is
   an insult to Christianity.

   Read your Bibles and store your minds with Scriptural arguments. A
   Bible-reading laity is a nation's surest defence against error. I have
   no fear for English Protestantism if the English laity will only do
   their duty. Read your Thirty-nine Articles and "Jewell's Apology," and
   see how those neglected documents speak of Romish doctrines. We
   clergymen, I fear, are often sadly to blame. We break the first Canon,
   which bids us preach four times every year against the Pope's
   supremacy! Too often we behave as if "giant Pope" was dead and buried,
   and never name him. Too often, for fear of giving offence, we neglect
   to show our people the real nature and evil of Popery.

   I entreat my readers, beside the Bible and Articles, to read history
   and see what Rome did in days gone by. Read how she trampled on your
   country's liberties, plundered your forefathers' pockets, and kept the
   whole nation ignorant, superstitious, and immoral. Read how Archbishop
   Laud ruined Church and State, and brought himself and King Charles to
   the scaffold by his foolish, obstinate, and God-displeasing effort to
   unprotestantize the Church of England. Read how the last Popish King of
   England, James the second, lost his crown by his daring attempt to put
   down protestantism and reintroduce Popery. And do not forget that Rome
   never changes. It is her boast and glory that she is infallible, and
   always the same.

   Read facts, standing out at this minute on the face of the globe, if
   you will not read history. What has made Italy and Sicily what they
   were till very lately? Popery.--What has made the South American States
   what they are? Popery.--What has made Spain and Portugal what they are?
   Popery.--What has made Ireland what she is in Munster, Leinster, and
   Connaught? Popery.--What makes Scotland, the United States, and our own
   beloved England the powerful, prosperous countries they are, and I pray
   God they may long continue? I answer, unhesitatingly, Protestantism--a
   free Bible and the principles of the Reformation. Oh, think twice
   before you cast aside the principles of the Reformation! Think twice
   before you give way to the prevailing tendency to favour Popery and go
   back to Rome.

   The Reformation found Englishmen steeped in ignorance and left them in
   possession of knowledge--found them without Bibles and placed a Bible
   in every parish--found them in darkness and left them in comparative
   light--found them priest-ridden and left them enjoying the liberty
   which Christ bestows--found them strangers to the blood of atonement,
   to faith and grace and real holiness, and left them with the key to
   these things in their hands--found them blind and left them
   seeing--found them slaves and left them free. For ever let us thank God
   for the Reformation! It lighted a candle which we ought never to allow
   to be extinguished or to burn dim. Surely I have a right to say that
   the times require of us a renewed sense of the evils of Romanism, and
   of the enormous value of the Protestant Reformation!

   IV. In the fourth place, the times require of us a higher standard of
   personal holiness, and an increased attention to practical religion in
   daily life.

   I must honestly declare my conviction that, since the days of the
   Reformation, there never has been so much profession of religion
   without practice, so much talking about God without walking with Him,
   so much hearing God's words without doing them, as there is in England
   at this present date. Never were there so many empty tubs and tinkling
   cymbals! Never was there so much formality and so little reality. The
   whole tone of men's minds on what constitutes practical Christianity
   seems lowered. The old golden standard of the behaviour which becomes a
   Christian man or woman appears debased and degenerated. You may see
   scores of religious people (so-called) continually doing things which
   in days gone by would have been thought utterly inconsistent with vital
   religion. They see no harm in such things as card-playing,
   theatre-going, dancing, incessant novel-reading, and Sunday-travelling,
   and they cannot in the least understand what you mean by objecting to
   them! The ancient tenderness of conscience about such things seems
   dying away and becoming extinct, like the dodo; and when you venture to
   remonstrate with young communicants who indulge in them, they only
   stare at you as an old-fashioned, narrow-minded, fossilized person and
   say, "Where is the harm?" In short, laxity of ideas among young men,
   and "fastness" and levity among young women, are only too common
   characteristics of the rising generation of Christian professors.

   Now in saying all this I would not be mistaken. I disclaim the
   slightest wish to recommend an ascetic religion. Monasteries,
   nunneries, complete retirement from the world, and refusal to do our
   duty in it, all these I hold to be unscriptural and mischievous
   nostrums. Nor can I ever see my way clear to urging on men an ideal
   standard of perfection for which I find no warrant in God's Word, a
   standard which is unattainable in this life, and hands over the
   management of the affairs of society to the devil and the wicked. No: I
   always wish to promote a genial, cheerful, manly religion, such as men
   may carry everywhere and yet glorify Christ.

   The pathway to a higher standard of holiness which I commend to the
   attention of my readers is a very simple one, so simple that I can
   fancy many smiling at it with disdain. But, simple as it is, it is a
   path sadly neglected and overgrown with weeds, and it is high time to
   direct men into it. We need then to examine more closely our good old
   friends the ten commandments. Beaten out, and properly developed as
   they were by Bishop Andrews and the Puritans, the two tables of God's
   law are a perfect mine of practical religion. I think it an evil sign
   of our day that many clergymen neglect to have the commandments put up
   in their new, or restored, churches, and coolly tell you "they are not
   wanted now!" I believe they never were wanted so much!--We need to
   examine more closely such portions of our Lord Jesus Christ's teaching
   as the Sermon on the Mount. How rich is that wonderful discourse in
   food for thought! What a striking sentence that is, "Except your
   righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye
   shall in no case enter the kingdon of heaven." (Matt. v. 20.) Alas,
   that text is rarely used!--Last, but not least, we need to study more
   closely the latter part of nearly all St. Paul's Epistles to the
   Churches. They are far too much slurred over and neglected. Scores of
   Bible readers, I am afraid, are well acquainted with the first eleven
   chapters of the Epistle to the Romans, but know comparatively little of
   the five last. When Thomas Scott expounded the Epistle to the Ephesians
   at the old Lock Chapel, he remarked that the congregations became much
   smaller when he reached the practical part of that blessed book! Once
   more I say you may think my recommendations very simple. I do not
   hesitate to affirm that attention to them would by God's blessing be
   most useful to Christ's cause. I believe it would raise the standard of
   English Christianity about such matters as home religion, separation
   from the world, diligence in the discharge of relative duties,
   unselfishness, good temper, and general spiritual-mindedness, to a
   pitch which it seldom attains now.

   There is a common complaint in these latter days that there is a want
   of power in modern Christianity, and that the true Church of Christ,
   the body of which He is the Head, does not shake the world in the
   twentieth century as it used to do in former years. Shall I tell you in
   plain words what is the reason? It is the low tone of life which is so
   sadly prevalent among professing believers. We want more men and women
   who walk with God and before God, like Enoch and Abraham. Though our
   numbers at this date far exceed those of our Evangelical forefathers, I
   believe we fall far short of them in our standard of Christian
   practice. Where is the self-denial, the redemption of time, the absence
   of luxury and self-indulgence, the unmistakable separation from earthly
   things, the manifest air of being always about our Master's business,
   the singleness of eye, the simplicity of home life, the high tone of
   conversation in society, the patience, the humility, the universal
   courtesy which marked so many of our forerunners seventy or eighty
   years ago? Yes: where is it indeed? We have inherited their principles
   and we wear their armour, but I fear we have not inherited their
   practice. The Holy Ghost sees it, and is grieved; and the world sees
   it, and despises us. The world sees it, and cares little for our
   testimony. It is life, life--a heavenly, godly, Christ-like
   life--depend on it, which influences the world. Let us resolve, by
   God's blessing, to shake off this reproach. Let us awake to a clear
   view of what the times require of us in this matter. Let us aim at a
   much higher standard of practice. Let the time past suffice us to have
   been content with a half-and-half holiness. For the time to come, let
   us endeavour to walk with God, to be "thorough" and unmistakable in our
   daily life, and to silence, if we cannot convert, a sneering world.

   V. In the fifth and last place, the times require of us more regular
   and steady perseverance in the old ways of getting good for our souls.

   I think no intelligent Englishman can fail to see that there has been
   of late years an immense increase of what I must call, for want of a
   better phrase, public religion in the land. Services of all sorts are
   strangely multiplied. Places of worship are thrown open for prayer and
   preaching and administration of the Lord's Supper, at least ten times
   as much as they were fifty years ago. Services in cathedral naves,
   meetings in large public rooms like the Agricultural Hall and Mildmay
   Conference Building, Mission Services carried on day after day and
   evening after evening--all these have become common and familiar
   things. They are, in fact, established institutions of the day, and the
   crowds who attend them supply plain proof that they are popular. In
   short, we find ourselves face to face with the undeniable fact that the
   last quarter of the nineteenth century is an age of an immense amount
   of public religion.

   Now I am not going to find fault with this. Let no one suppose that for
   a moment. On the contrary, I thank God for the revival of the old
   apostolic plan of "aggressiveness" in religion, and the evident spread
   of a desire "by all means to save some." (1 Cor. ix. 22.) I thank God
   for shortened services, home missions, and evangelistic movements like
   that of Moody and Sankey. Anything is better than torpor, apathy, and
   inaction. "If Christ is preached I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice."
   (Phil. i. 18.) Prophets and righteous men in England once desired to
   see those things, and never saw them. If Whitfield and Wesley had been
   told in their day that a time would come when English Archbishops and
   Bishops would not only sanction mission services but take an active
   part in them, I can hardly think they would have believed it. Rather, I
   suspect, they would have been tempted to say, like the Samaritan
   nobleman in Elisha's time, "If the Lord would make windows in heaven,
   might this thing be." (2 Kings vii. 2.)

   But while we are thankful for the increase of public religion, we must
   never forget that, unless it is accompanied by private religion, it is
   of no real solid value, and may even produce most mischievous effects.
   Incessant running after sensational preachers, incessant attendance at
   hot, crowded meetings, protracted to late hours, incessant craving
   after fresh excitement and highly-spiced pulpit novelties--all this
   kind of thing is calculated to produce a very unhealthy style of
   Christianity; and, in many cases, I am afraid, the end is utter ruin of
   soul. For, unhappily, those who make public religion everything, are
   often led away by mere temporary emotions, after some grand display of
   ecclesiastical oratory, into professing far more than they really feel.
   After this, they can only be kept up to the mark, which they imagine
   they have reached, by a constant succession of religious excitements.
   By and by, as with opium-eaters and dram-drinkers, there comes a time
   when their dose loses its power, and a feeling of exhaustion and
   discontent begins to creep over their minds. Too often, I fear, the
   conclusion of the whole matter is a relapse into utter deadness and
   unbelief, and a complete return to the world. And all results from
   having nothing but a public religion! Oh, that people would remember
   that it was not the wind, or the fire, or the earthquake, which showed
   Elijah the presence of God, but "the still, small voice." (1 Kings xix.
   12.)

   Now I desire to lift up a warning voice on this subject. I want to see
   no decrease of public religion, remember: but I do want to promote an
   increase of that religion which is private--private between each man
   and his God. The root of a plant or tree makes no show above ground. If
   you dig down to it and examine it, it is a poor, dirty, coarse-looking
   thing, and not nearly so beautiful to the eye as the fruit, or leaf, or
   flower. But that despised root, nevertheless, is the true source of all
   the life, health, vigour and fertility which your eyes see, and without
   it the plant or tree would soon die. Now private religion is the root
   of all vital Christianity. Without it, we may make a brave show in the
   meeting or on the platform, and sing loud, and shed many tears, and
   have a name to live and the praise of man. But without it we have no
   wedding garment, and are "dead before God." I tell my readers plainly
   that the times require of us all more attention to our private
   religion.

   (a) Let us pray more heartily in private, and throw our whole souls
   more into our prayers. There are live prayers and there are dead
   prayers--prayers that cost us nothing and prayers which often cost us
   strong crying and tears. What are yours? When great professors
   backslide in public, and the Church is surprised and shocked, the truth
   is that they had long ago backslidden on their knees. They had
   neglected the throne of grace.

   (b) Let us read our Bibles in private more, and with more pains and
   diligence. Ignorance of Scripture is the root of all error and makes a
   man helpless in the hand of the devil. There is less private
   Bible-reading, I suspect, than there was fifty years ago. I never can
   believe that so many English men and women would have been "tossed to
   and fro with every wind of doctrine," some falling into scepticism,
   some rushing into the wildest and narrowest fanaticism, and some going
   over to Rome, if there had not grown up a habit of lazy, superficial,
   careless, perfunctory reading of God's Word. "Ye do err not knowing the
   Scriptures." (Matt. xxii. 29.) The Bible in the pulpit must never
   supersede the Bible at home.

   (c) Let us cultivate the habit of keeping up more private meditation
   and communion with Christ. Let us resolutely make time for getting
   alone occasionally, for talking with our own souls like David, for
   pouring out our hearts to our Great High Priest, Advocate, and
   Confessor at the right hand of God. We want more auricular confession:
   but not to man. The confessional we want is not a box in the vestry,
   but the throne of grace. I see some professing Christians always
   running about after spiritual food, always in public, and always out of
   breath and in a hurry, and never allowing themselves leisure to sit
   down quietly to digest, and take stock of their spiritual condition. I
   am never surprised if such Christians have a dwarfish, stunted religion
   and do not grow, and if, like Pharaoh's lean kine, they look no better
   for their public religious feasting, but rather worse. Spiritual
   prosperity depends immensely on our private religion, and private
   religion cannot nourish unless we determine that by God's help we will
   make time, whatever trouble it may cost us, for thought, for prayer,
   for the Bible, and for private communion with Christ. Alas! That saying
   of our Master is sadly overlooked: "Enter into thy closet and shut the
   door." (Matt. vi. 6.)

   Our Evangelical forefathers had far fewer means and opportunities than
   we have. Full religious meetings and crowds, except occasionally at a
   Church or in a field when such men as Whitfield, or Wesley, or Rowlands
   preached, these were things of which they knew nothing. Their
   proceedings were neither fashionable nor popular, and often brought on
   them more persecution and abuse than praise. But the few weapons they
   used, they used well. With less noise and applause from man they made,
   I believe, a far deeper mark for God on their generation than we do,
   with all our Conferences, and Meetings, and Mission rooms, and Halls,
   and multiplied religious appliances. Their converts, I suspect, like
   the old-fashioned cloths and linens, wore better, and lasted longer,
   and faded less, and kept colour, and were more stable, and rooted, and
   grounded than many of the new-born babes of this day. And what was the
   reason of all this? Simply, I believe, because they gave more attention
   to private religion than we generally do. They walked closely with God
   and honoured Him in private, and so He honoured them in public. Oh, let
   us follow them as they followed Christ! Let us go and do likewise.

   Let me now conclude this paper with a few words of practical
   application.

   (1) First of all, would you understand what the times require of you in
   reference to your own soul? Listen, and I will tell you. You live in
   times of peculiar spiritual danger. Never perhaps were there more traps
   and pitfalls in the way to heaven: never certainly were those traps so
   skilfully baited and those pitfalls so ingeniously made. Mind what you
   are about. Look well to your goings. Ponder the paths of your feet.
   Take heed lest you come to eternal grief and ruin your own soul. Beware
   of practical infidelity under the specious name of free thought. Beware
   of a helpless state of indecision about doctrinal truth under the
   plausible idea of not being party spirited, and under the baneful
   influence of so-called liberality and charity. Beware of frittering
   away life in wishing, and meaning, and hoping for the day of decision,
   until the door is shut and you are given over to a dead conscience and
   die without hope. Awake to a sense of your danger. Arise and give
   diligence to make your calling and election sure, whatever else you
   leave uncertain. The kingdom of God is very nigh. Christ the Almighty
   Saviour, Christ the sinner's Friend, Christ and eternal life, are ready
   for you if you will only come to Christ. Arise and cast away excuses:
   this very day Christ calleth you. Wait not for company if you cannot
   have It; wait for nobody. The times, I repeat, are desperately
   dangerous. If only few are in the narrow way of life, resolve that by
   God's help you at any rate will be among the few.

   (2) In the next place, would you understand what the times require of
   all Christians in reference to the souls of others? Listen, and I will
   tell you. You live in times of great liberty and abounding
   opportunities of doing good. Never were there so many open doors of
   usefulness, so many fields white to the harvest. Mind that you use
   those open doors, and try to reap those fields. Try to do a little good
   before you die. Strive to be useful. Determine that, by God's help, you
   will leave the world a better world in the day of your burial than it
   was in the day you were born. Remember the souls of relatives, friends
   and companions; remember that God often works by weak instruments, and
   try with holy ingenuity to lead them to Christ. The time is short: the
   sand is running out of the glass of this old world; then redeem the
   time, and endeavour not to go to heaven alone. No doubt you cannot
   command success. It is not certain that your efforts to do good will
   always do good to others: but it is quite certain that they will always
   do good to yourself. Exercise, exercise, is one grand secret of health,
   both for body and soul. "He that watereth shall be watered himself."
   (Prov. ii. 25.) It is a deep and golden saying of our Master's, but
   seldom understood in its full meaning--"It is more blessed to give than
   to receive." (Acts xx. 35.)

   (3) In the last place, would you understand what the times require of
   you in reference to the Church of England? Listen to me, and I will
   tell you. No doubt you live in days when our time- honoured Church is
   in a very perilous, distressing, and critical position. Her rowers have
   brought her into troubled waters. Her very existence is endangered by
   Papists, Infidels, and Liberationists without. Her life-blood is
   drained away by the behaviour of traitors, false friends, and timid
   officers within. Nevertheless, so long as the Church of England sticks
   firmly to the Bible, the Articles, and the principles of the Protestant
   Reformation, so long I advise you strongly to stick to the Church. When
   the Articles are thrown overboard and the old flag is hauled down,
   then, and not till then, it will be time for you and me to launch the
   boats and quit the wreck. At present, let us stick to the old ship.

   Why should we leave her now, like cowards, because she is in
   difficulties and the truth cannot be maintained within her pale without
   trouble? How can we better ourselves? To whom can we go? Where shall we
   find better prayers? In what communion shall we find so much good being
   done, in spite of the existence of much evil? No doubt there is much to
   sadden us; but there is not a single visible Church on earth at this
   day doing better. There is not a single communion where there are no
   clouds, and all is serene. "The evils everywhere are mingled with the
   good:" the wheat never grows without tares. But for all that, there is
   much to gladden us, more Evangelical preaching than there ever was
   before in the land, more work done both at home and abroad. If old
   William Romaine, of St. Anne's, Blackfriars, who stood alone with some
   half-a-dozen others in London last century, had lived to see what our
   eyes see, he would have sharply rebuked our faintheartedness and
   unthankfulness. No! the battle of the Reformed Church of England is not
   yet lost, in spite of semi-popery and scepticism, whatever jealous
   onlookers without and melancholy grumblers within may please to say. As
   Napoleon said at four o'clock on the battlefield of Marengo, "there is
   yet time to win a victory." If the really loyal members of the Church
   will only stand by her boldly, and not look coolly at one another, and
   refuse to work the same fire-engine, or man the same lifeboat--if they
   will not squabble and quarrel and "fall out by the way," the Church of
   England will live and not die, and be a blessing to our children's
   children. Then let us set our feet down firmly and stand fast in our
   position. Let us not be in a hurry to quit the ship because of a few
   leaks: let us rather man the pumps, and try to keep the good ship
   afloat. Let us work on, and fight on, and pray on, and stick to the
   Church of England. The Churchman who walks in these lines, I believe,
   is the Churchman who "understands the times."
     __________________________________________________________________

XX.
"CHRIST IS ALL"

   "Christ is all."--Colossians iii. 11.

   THE words of the text which heads this page are few, short, and soon
   spoken; but they contain great things. Like those golden sayings, "To
   me to live is Christ"--"I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me
   "--they are singularly rich and suggestive. (Phil. i. 21; Gal. ii. 20.)

   These three words are the essence and substance of Christianity. If our
   hearts can really go along with them, it is well with our souls. If
   not, we may be sure we have yet much to learn.

   Let me try to set before my readers in what sense "Christ is all"; and
   let me ask them, as they read, to judge themselves honestly, that they
   may not make shipwreck in the judgment of the last day.

   I purposely close this volume with a paper on this remarkable text.
   Christ is the mainspring both of doctrinal and practical Christianity.
   A right knowledge of Christ is essential to a right knowledge of
   sanctification as well as justification. He that follows after holiness
   will make no progress unless he gives to Christ His rightful place. I
   began the volume with a plain statement about sin. Let me end it with
   an equally plain statement about Christ.

   I. First of all, let us understand that Christ is all, in all the
   counsels of God concerning man.

   (a) There was a time when this earth had no being. Solid as the
   mountains look, boundless as the sea appears, high as the stars in
   heaven look--they once did not exist. And man, with all the high
   thoughts he now has of himself, was a creature unknown.

   And where was Christ then?

   Even then Christ was "with God "--and "was God"--and was "equal with
   God." (John i. 1; Phil. ii. 6.) Even then He was the beloved Son of the
   Father: "Thou lovedst Me," He says, "before the foundation of the
   world."--"I had glory with Thee before the world began."--"I was set up
   from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was." (John
   xvii. 5, 24; Prov. viii. 23.) Even then He was the Saviour
   "foreordained before the foundation of the world" (1 Peter i. 20), and
   believers were "chosen in Him." (Ephes. i. 4.)

   (b) There came a time when this earth was created in its present order.
   Sun, moon and stars--sea, land and all their inhabitants, were called
   into being and made out of chaos and confusion. And, last of all, man
   was formed out of the dust of the ground.

   And where was Christ then?

   Hear what the Scripture says: "All things were made by Him, and without
   Him was not any thing made that was made." (John i. 3.) "By Him were
   all things created, that are in heaven and that are in earth." (Colos.
   i. 16.) "And Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of
   the earth; and the heavens are the works of Thine hands." (Heb. i. 10.)
   "When He prepared the heavens, I was there: when He set a compass upon
   the face of the depth: when He established the clouds above: when He
   strengthened the foundations of the deep: when He gave to the sea His
   decree, that the water should not pass His commandment: when He
   appointed the foundations of the earth: then I was by Him, as one
   brought up with Him." (Prov. viii. 27-30.) Can we wonder that the Lord
   Jesus, in His preaching, should continually draw lessons from the book
   of nature? When He spoke of the sheep, the fish, the ravens, the corn,
   the lilies, the fig-tree, the vine--He spoke of things which He Himself
   had made.

   (c) There came a day when sin entered the world.--Adam and Eve ate the
   forbidden fruit, and fell. They lost that holy nature in which they
   were first formed. They forfeited the friendship and favour of God and
   became guilty, corrupt, helpless, hopeless sinners. Sin came as a
   barrier between themselves and their holy Father in heaven. Had He
   dealt with them according to their deserts, there had been nothing
   before them but death, hell, and everlasting ruin.

   And where was Christ then?

   In that very day He was revealed to our trembling parents, as the only
   hope of salvation. The very day they fell, they were told that "the
   seed of the woman should yet bruise the serpent's head,"--that a
   Saviour born of a woman should overcome the devil and win for sinful
   man an entrance to eternal life. (Gen. iii. 15.) Christ was held up as
   the true light of the world, in the very day of the fall; and never has
   any name been made known from that day by which souls could be saved,
   excepting His. By Him all saved souls have entered heaven, from Adam
   downwards; and without Him none have ever escaped hell.

   (d) There came a time when the world seemed sunk and buried in
   ignorance of God. After 4,000 years the nations of the earth appeared
   to have clean forgotten the God that made them. Egyptian, Assyrian,
   Persian, Grecian, and Roman empires had done nothing but spread
   superstition and idolatry. Poets, historians, philosophers had proved
   that, with all their intellectual powers, they had no right knowledge
   of God; and that man, left to himself, was utterly corrupt. "The world,
   by wisdom, knew not God." (1 Cor. i. 21.) Excepting a few despised Jews
   in a corner of the earth, the whole world was dead in ignorance and
   sin.

   And what did Christ do then?

   He left the glory He had had from all eternity with the Father, and
   came down into the world to provide a salvation. He took our nature
   upon Him, and was born as a man. As a man He did the will of God
   perfectly, which we all had left undone: as a man He suffered on the
   cross the wrath of God which we ought to have suffered. He brought in
   everlasting righteousness for us. He redeemed us from the curse of a
   broken law. He opened a fountain for all sin and uncleanness. He died
   for our sins. He rose again for our justification. He ascended to God's
   right hand, and there sat down, waiting till His enemies should be made
   His footstool. And there He sits now, offering salvation to all who
   will come to Him, interceding for all who believe in Him, and managing
   by God's appointment all that concerns the salvation of souls.

   (e) There is a time coming when sin shall be cast out from this
   world.--Wickedness shall not always flourish unpunished--Satan shall
   not always reign--creation shall not always groan, being burdened.
   There shall be a time of restitution of all things. There shall be a
   new heaven and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness, and the
   earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover
   the sea. (Rom. viii. 22; Acts iii. 21; 2 Pet. iii. 13; Isa. xi. 9.)

   And where shall Christ be then? And what shall He do?

   Christ Himself shall be King. He shall return to this earth and make
   all things new. He shall come in the clouds of heaven with power and
   great glory, and the kingdoms of the world shall become His. The
   heathen shall be given to Him for His inheritance, and the uttermost
   parts of the earth for His possession. To Him every knee shall bow, and
   every tongue shall confess that He is Lord. His dominion shall be an
   everlasting dominion which shall not pass away, and His kingdom that
   which shall not be destroyed. (Matt. xxiv. 30; Rev. xi. 15; Psalm ii.
   8; Phil. ii. 10, 11; Dan. vii. 14.)

   (f) There is a day coming when all men shall be judged. The sea shall
   give up the dead which are in it, and death and hell shall deliver up
   the dead which are in them. All that sleep in the grave shall awake and
   come forth, and all shall be judged according to their works. (Rev. xx.
   13; Dan. xii. 2.)

   And where will Christ be then?

   Christ Himself will be the Judge. "The Father hath committed all
   judgment unto the Son."--"When the Son of man shall come in His glory,
   then shall He sit upon the throne of His glory:--and before Him shall
   be gathered all nations: and He shall separate them one from another,
   as a shepherd divideth the sheep from the goats."--"We must all appear
   before the judgment seat of Christ: that every one may receive the
   things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be
   good or bad." (John v. 22; Matt. xxv. 32; 2 Cor. v. 10.)

   Now if any reader of this paper thinks little of Christ, let him know
   this day that he is very unlike God! You are of one mind, and God is of
   another. You think it enough to give Christ a little honour--a little
   reverence--a little respect. But in all the eternal counsels of God the
   Father, in creation, redemption, restitution, and judgment--in all
   these, Christ is "all."

   Surely we shall do well to consider these things. Surely it is not
   written in vain, "He that honoureth not the Son, honoureth not the
   Father which hath sent Him." (John v. 23.)

   II. In the second place, let us understand that "Christ is all" in the
   inspired books which make up the Bible.

   In every part of both Testaments, Christ is to be found--dimly and
   indistinctly at the beginning--more clearly and plainly in the
   middle--fully and completely at the end--but really and substantially
   everywhere.

   Christ's sacrifice and death for sinners, and Christ's kingdom and
   future glory, are the light we must bring to bear on any book of
   Scripture we read. Christ's cross and Christ's crown are the clue we
   must hold fast if we would find our way through Scripture difficulties.
   Christ is the only key that will unlock many of the dark places of the
   Word. Some people complain that they do not understand the Bible. And
   the reason is very simple. They do not use the key. To them the Bible
   is like the hieroglyphics in Egypt. It is a mystery, just because they
   do not know and employ the key.

   (a) It was Christ crucified who was set forth in every Old Testament
   sacrifice. Every animal slain and offered on an altar was a practical
   confession that a Saviour was looked for who would die for sinners--a
   Saviour who should take away man's sin, by suffering, as his Substitute
   and Sin-bearer, in his stead, (1 Peter iii. 18.) It is absurd to
   suppose that an unmeaning slaughter of innocent beasts, without a
   distinct object in view, could please the eternal God!

   (b) It was Christ to whom Abel looked when he offered a better
   sacrifice than Cain. Not only was the heart of Abel better than that of
   his brother, but he showed his knowledge of vicarious sacrifice and his
   faith in an atonement. He offered the firstlings of his flock, with the
   blood thereof, and in so doing declared his belief that without
   shedding of blood there is no remission. (Heb. xi. 4.)

   (c) It was Christ of whom Enoch prophesied in the days of abounding
   wickedness before the flood.--"Behold," he said, "the Lord cometh with
   ten thousands of His saints, to execute judgment upon all." (Jude 15.)

   (d) It was Christ to whom Abraham looked when he dwelt in tents in the
   land of promise. He believed that in his seed--in one born of his
   family--all the nations of the earth should be blessed. By faith he saw
   Christ's day, and was glad. (John viii. 56.)

   (e) It was Christ of whom Jacob spoke to his sons, as he lay dying. He
   marked out the tribe out of which He would be born, and foretold that
   "gathering together" unto Him which is yet to be accomplished. "The
   sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor the law-giver from between his
   feet, until Shiloh come, and unto Him shall the gathering of the people
   be." (Gen. xlix. 10.)

   (f) It was Christ who was the substance of the ceremonial law which God
   gave to Israel by the hand of Moses. The morning and evening
   sacrifice--the continual shedding of blood--the altar--the
   mercy-seat--the high priest--the passover--the day of atonement--the
   scapegoat:--all these were so many pictures, types, and emblems of
   Christ and His work. God had compassion upon the weakness of His
   people. He taught them "Christ" line upon line, and, as we teach little
   children, by similitudes. It was in this sense especially that "the law
   was a schoolmaster to lead" the Jews "unto Christ." (Gal. iii. 24.)

   (g) It was Christ to whom God directed the attention of Israel by all
   the daily miracles which were done before their eyes in the wilderness.
   The pillar of cloud and fire which guided them--the manna from heaven
   which every morning fed them--the water from the smitten rock which
   followed them--all and each were figures of Christ. The brazen serpent,
   on that memorable occasion when the plague of fiery serpents was sent
   upon them, was an emblem of Christ. (1 Cor. x. 4; John iii. 14.)

   (h) It was Christ of whom all the Judges were types. Joshua, and David,
   and Gideon, and Jephthah, and Samson, and all the rest whom God raised
   up to deliver Israel from captivity--all were emblems of Christ. Weak
   and unstable and faulty as some of them were, they were set for example
   of better things in the distant future. All were meant to remind the
   tribes of that far higher Deliverer who was yet to come.

   (i) It was Christ of whom David the king was a type. Anointed and
   chosen when few gave him honour--despised and rejected by Saul and all
   the tribes of Israel--persecuted and obliged to flee for his life--a
   man of sorrow all his life, and yet at length a conqueror--in all these
   things David represented Christ.

   (j) It was Christ of whom all the prophets from Isaiah to Malachi
   spoke. They saw through a glass darkly. They sometimes dwelt on His
   sufferings, and sometimes on His glory that should follow. (1 Peter i.
   11.) They did not always mark out for us the distinction between
   Christ's first coming and Christ's second coming. Like two candles in a
   straight line, one behind the other, they sometimes saw both the
   advents at the same time, and spoke of them in one breath. They were
   sometimes moved by the Holy Ghost to write of the times of Christ
   crucified, and sometimes of Christ's kingdom in the latter days. But
   Jesus dying, or Jesus reigning, was the thought you will ever find
   uppermost in their minds.

   (k) It is Christ, I need hardly say, of whom the whole New Testament is
   full. The Gospels are "Christ" living, speaking, and moving among men.
   The Acts are "Christ" preached, published, and proclaimed. The Epistles
   are "Christ" written of, explained, and exalted. But all through, from
   first to last, there is one name above every other, and that is the
   name of Christ.

   I charge every reader of this paper to ask himself frequently what the
   Bible is to him. Is it a Bible in which you have found nothing more
   than good moral precepts and sound advice? Or is it a Bible in which
   you have found Christ? Is it a Bible in which "Christ is all "? If not,
   I tell you plainly, you have hitherto used your Bible to very little
   purpose. You are like a man who studies the solar system and leaves out
   in his studies the sun, which is the centre of all. It is no wonder if
   you find your Bible a dull book!

   III. In the third place, let us understand that "Christ is all" in the
   religion of all true Christians on earth.

   In saying this, I wish to guard myself against being misunderstood. I
   hold the absolute necessity of the election of God the Father, and the
   sanctification of God the Spirit, in order to effect the salvation of
   everyone that is saved. I hold that there is a perfect harmony and
   unison in the action of the three Persons of the Trinity, in bringing
   any man to glory, and that all three co-operate and work a joint work
   in his deliverance from sin and hell. Such as the Father is, such is
   the Son, and such is the Holy Ghost. The Father is merciful, the Son is
   merciful, the Holy Ghost is merciful. The same three who said at the
   beginning, "Let us create," said also, "Let us redeem and save." I hold
   that everyone who reaches heaven will ascribe all the glory of his
   salvation to Father, Son and Holy Ghost, three Persons in one God.

   But, at the same time, I see clear proof in Scripture that it is the
   mind of the blessed Trinity that Christ should be prominently and
   distinctly exalted in the matter of saving souls. Christ is set forth
   as the "Word," through whom God's love to sinners is made known.
   Christ's incarnation and atoning death on the cross are the great
   corner-stone on which the whole plan of salvation rests. Christ is the
   way and door, by which alone approaches to God are to be made. Christ
   is the root into which all elect sinners must be grafted. Christ is the
   only meeting-place between God and man, between heaven and earth,
   between the Holy Trinity and the poor sinful child of Adam. It is
   Christ whom God the Father has "sealed" and appointed to convey life to
   a dead world. (John vi. 27.) It is Christ to whom the Father has given
   a people to be brought to glory. It is Christ of whom the Spirit
   testifies, and to whom He always leads a soul for pardon and peace. In
   short, it has "pleased the Father that in Christ all fulness should
   dwell." (Coloss. i. 19.) What the sun is in the firmament of heaven,
   that Christ is in true Christianity.

   I say these things by way of explanation. I want my readers clearly to
   understand that in saying "Christ is all," I do not mean to shut out
   the work of the Father and of the Spirit. Now let me show what I do
   mean.

   (a) Christ is all in a sinner's justification before God.

   Through Him alone we can have peace with a Holy God, By Him alone we
   can have admission into the presence of the Most High, and stand there
   without fear. "We have boldness and access with confidence by the faith
   of Him." In Him alone can God be just, and justify the ungodly. (Ephes.
   iii. 12; Rom. iii. 26.)

   Wherewith can any mortal man come before God? What can we bring as a
   plea for acquittal before that Glorious Being, in whose eyes the very
   heavens are not clean?

   Shall we say that we have done our duty to God? Shall we say that we
   have done our duty to our neighbour? Shall we bring forward our
   prayers?--our regularity?--our morality?--our amendments?--our
   church-going? Shall we ask to be accepted because of any of these?

   Which of these things will stand the searching inspection of God's eye.
   Which of them will actually justify us? Which of them will carry us
   clear through judgment, and land us safe in glory?

   None, none, none! Take any commandment of the ten, and let us examine
   ourselves by it. We have broken it repeatedly. We cannot answer God one
   of a thousand.--Take any of us, and look narrowly into our ways--and we
   are nothing but sinners. There is but one verdict: we are all
   guilty--all deserve hell--all ought to die. Wherewith can we come
   before God?

   We must come in the name of Jesus--standing on no other
   ground--pleading no other plea than this, "Christ died on the cross for
   the ungodly, and I trust in Him. Christ died for me, and I believe on
   Him."

   The garment of our Elder Brother--the righteousness of Christ--this is
   the only robe which can cover us and enable us to stand in the light of
   heaven without shame.

   The name of Jesus is the only name by which we shall obtain an entrance
   through the gate of eternal glory. If we come to that gate in our own
   names, we are lost, we shall not be admitted, we shall knock in vain.
   If we come in the name of Jesus, it is a passport and Shibboleth, and
   we shall enter and live.

   The mark of the blood of Christ is the only mark that can save us from
   destruction. When the angels are separating the children of Adam in the
   last day, if we are not found marked with that atoning blood, we had
   better never have been born.

   Oh, let us never forget that Christ must be "all" to that soul who
   would be justified!--We must be content to go to heaven as
   beggars--saved by free grace, simply as believers in Jesus--or we shall
   never be saved at all.

   Is there a thoughtless, worldly soul among the readers of this book? Is
   there one who thinks to reach heaven by saying hastily at the last,
   "Lord have mercy on me" without Christ? Friend, you are sowing misery
   for yourself, and unless you alter you will awake to endless woe.

   Is there a proud, formal soul among the readers of this book? Is there
   anyone thinking to make himself fit for heaven and good enough to pass
   muster by his own doings?--Brother, you are building a Babel, and you
   will never reach heaven in your present state.

   But is there a labouring, heavy-laden one among the readers of this
   book? Is there one who wants to be saved, and feels a vile sinner? I
   say to such an one, "Come to Christ, and He shall save you. Come to
   Christ, and cast the burden of your soul on Him. Fear not: only
   believe."

   Do you fear wrath? Christ can deliver you from the wrath to come.--Do
   you feel the curse of a broken law? Christ can redeem you from the
   curse of the law.--Do you feel far away? Christ has suffered, to bring
   you nigh to God.--Do you feel unclean? Christ's blood can cleanse all
   sin away.--Do you feel imperfect? You shall be complete in Christ.--Do
   you feel as if you were nothing? Christ shall be "all in all" to your
   soul.--Never did saint reach heaven with any tale but this, "I was
   washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb." (Rev. vii. 14.)

   (b) But again, Christ is not only all in the justification of a true
   Christian, but He is also all in his sanctification.

   I would not have anyone misunderstand me. I do not mean for a moment to
   undervalue the work of the Spirit. But this I say, that no man is ever
   holy till he comes to Christ and is united to Him. Till then his works
   are dead works, and he has no holiness at all.--First you must be
   joined to Christ, and then you shall be holy. "Without Him--separate
   from Him--you can do nothing." (John xv. 5.)

   And no man can grow in holiness except he abides in Christ. Christ is
   the great root from which every believer must draw his strength to go
   forward. The Spirit is His special gift, His purchased gift for His
   people. A believer must not only "receive Christ Jesus the Lord," but
   "walk in Him, and be rooted and built up in Him." (Col. ii. 6, 7.)

   Would you be holy? Then Christ is the manna you must daily eat, like
   Israel in the wilderness of old. Would you be holy? Then Christ must be
   the rock from which you must daily drink the living water. Would you be
   holy? Then you must be ever looking unto Jesus--looking at His cross,
   and learning fresh motives for a closer walk with God--looking at His
   example, and taking Him for your pattern. Looking at Him, you would
   become like Him. Looking at Him, your face would shine without your
   knowing it. Look less at yourself and more at Christ, and you will find
   besetting sins dropping off and leaving you, and your eyes enlightened
   more and more every day. (Heb. xii. 2; 2 Cor. iii. 18.)

   The true secret of coming up out of the wilderness is to come up
   "leaning on the Beloved." (Cant. viii. 5.) The true way to be strong is
   to realize our weakness and to feel that Christ must be all. The true
   way to grow in grace is to make use of Christ as a fountain for every
   minute's necessities. We ought to employ Him as the prophet's wife
   employed the oil--not only to pay our debts, but to live on also. We
   should strive to be able to say, "The life that I now live in the flesh
   I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave Himself
   for me." (2 Kings iv. 7; Gal. ii. 20.)

   I pity those who try to be holy without Christ! Your labour is all in
   vain. You are putting money in a bag with holes. You are pouring water
   into a sieve. You are rolling a huge round stone uphill. You are
   building up a wall with untempered mortar. Believe me, you are
   beginning at the wrong end. You must come to Christ first, and He shall
   give you His sanctifying Spirit. You must learn to say with Paul, "I
   can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me." (Phil. iv.
   13.)

   (c) But again, Christ is not only all in the sanctification of a true
   Christian, but all in his comfort in time present.

   A saved soul has many sorrows. He has a body like other men--weak and
   frail. He has a heart like other men--and often a more sensitive one,
   too. He has trials and losses to bear like others--and often more. He
   has his share of bereavements, deaths, disappointments, crosses. He has
   the world to oppose--a place in life to fill blamelessly--unconverted
   relatives to bear with patiently--persecutions to endure--and a death
   to die.

   And who is sufficient for these things? What shall enable a believer to
   bear all this? Nothing but "the consolation there is in Christ." (Phil.
   ii. 1.)

   Jesus is indeed the brother born for adversity. He is the friend that
   sticketh closer than a brother, and He alone can comfort His people. He
   can be touched with the feeling of their infirmities, for He suffered
   Himself. (Heb. iv. 15.) He knows what sorrow is, for He was a Man of
   sorrows. He knows what an aching body is, for His body was racked with
   pain. He cried, "All my bones are out of joint." (Ps. xxii. 14.) He
   knows what poverty and weariness are, for He was often wearied and had
   not where to lay His head. He knows what family unkindness is, for even
   His brethren did not believe Him. He had no honour in His own house.

   And Jesus knows exactly how to comfort His afflicted people. He knows
   how to pour in oil and wine into the wounds of the spirit--how to fill
   up gaps in empty hearts--how to speak a word in season to the
   weary--how to heal the broken heart--how to make all our bed in
   sickness--how to draw nigh when we are faint, and say, "Fear not: I am
   thy salvation." (Lam. iii. 57.)

   We talk of sympathy being pleasant. There is no sympathy like that of
   Christ. In all our afflictions He is afflicted. He knows our sorrows.
   In all our pain He is pained, and like the good Physician, He will not
   measure out to us one drop of sorrow too much. David once said, "In the
   multitude of my thoughts within me, Thy comforts delight my soul." (Ps.
   xciv. 19.) Many a believer, I am sure, could say as much. "If the Lord
   Himself had not stood by me, the deep waters would have gone over my
   soul," (Ps. cxxiv. 5.)

   How a believer gets through all his troubles appears wonderful. How he
   is carried through the fire and water he passes through seems past
   comprehension. But the true account of it is just this--that Christ is
   not only justification and sanctification, but consolation also.

   Oh, you who want unfailing comfort, I commend you to Christ! In Him
   alone there is no failure. Rich men are disappointed in their
   treasures. Learned men are disappointed in their books. Husbands are
   disappointed in their wives. Wives are disappointed in their husbands.
   Parents are disappointed in their children. Statesmen are disappointed
   when, after many a struggle, they attain place and power. They find
   out, to their cost, that it is more pain than pleasure--that it is
   disappointment, annoyance, incessant trouble, worry, vanity, and
   vexation of spirit. But no man was ever disappointed in Christ.

   (d) But as Christ is all in the comforts of a true Christian in time
   present, so Christ is all in his hopes for time to come.

   Few men and women, I suppose, are to be found who do not indulge in
   hopes of some kind about their souls. But the hopes of the vast
   majority are nothing but vain fancies. They are built on no solid
   foundation. No living man but the real child of God--the sincere,
   thoroughgoing Christian--can give a reasonable account of the hope that
   is in him. No hope is reasonable which is not Scriptural.

   A true Christian has a good hope when he looks forward: the worldly man
   has none. A true Christian sees light in the distance: the worldly man
   sees nothing but darkness. And what is the hope of a true Christian? It
   is just this--that Jesus Christ is coming again, coming without
   sin--coming with all His people, coming to wipe away every tear--coming
   to raise His sleeping saints from the grave--coming to gather together
   all His family, that they may be for ever with Him.

   Why is a believer patient? because he looks for the coming of the Lord.
   He can bear hard things without murmuring. He knows the time is short.
   He waits quietly for the King.

   Why is he moderate in all things? Because he expects his Lord soon to
   return. His treasure is in heaven, his good things are yet to come. The
   world is not his rest, but an inn; and an inn is not home. He knows
   that "He that shall come will soon come, and will not tarry." Christ is
   coming, and that is enough. (Heb. x. 37.)

   This is indeed a "blessed hope!" (Titus ii. 13.) Now is the
   school-time--then the eternal holiday. Now is the tossing on the waves
   of a troublesome world--then the quiet harbour. Now is the
   scattering--then the gathering. Now is the time of sowing--then the
   harvest. Now is the working season--then the wages. Now is the
   cross--then the crown.

   People talk of their "expectations" and hopes from this world. None
   have such solid expectations as a saved soul. He can say, "My soul,
   wait thou only upon God; my expectation is from Him." (Ps. lxii. 5.)

   In all true saving religion Christ is all: all in justification--all in
   comfort--all in hope. Blessed is that mother's child that knows it, and
   far more blessed is he that feels it too. Oh that men would prove
   themselves, and see what they know of it for their own souls!

   IV. One thing more I will add, and then I have done. Let us understand
   that Christ will be all in heaven.

   I cannot dwell long on this point. I have not power, if I had space and
   room. I can ill describe things unseen and a world unknown. But this I
   know, that all men and women who reach heaven will find that even there
   also "Christ is all."

   Like the altar in Solomon's temple, Christ crucified will be the grand
   object in heaven. That altar struck the eye of every one who entered
   the temple gates. It was a great brazen altar, twenty cubits broad--as
   broad as the front of the temple itself. (2 Chron. iii. 4; iv. 1.) So
   in like manner will Jesus fill the eyes of all who enter glory. In the
   midst of the throne and surrounded by adoring angels and saints, there
   will be "the Lamb that was slain." And "the Lamb shall be the light" of
   the place. (Rev. v. 6; xxi. 23.)

   The praise of the Lord Jesus will be the eternal song of all the
   inhabitants of heaven. They will say with a loud voice, "Worthy is the
   Lamb that was slain. Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be to
   Him that sitteth on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever."
   (Rev. v. 12. 13.)

   The service of the Lord Jesus will be one eternal occupation of all the
   inhabitants of heaven. We shall "serve Him day and night in His
   temple." (Rev. vii. 13.) Blessed is the thought that we shall at length
   attend on Him without distraction, and work for Him without weariness.

   The presence of Christ Himself shall be one everlasting enjoyment of
   the inhabitants of heaven. We shall "see His face," and hear His voice,
   and speak with Him as friend with friend. (Rev. xxii. 4.) Sweet is the
   thought that whosoever may be wanting at the marriage supper, the
   Master Himself will be there. His presence will satisfy all our wants.
   (Ps. xvii. 15.)

   What a sweet and glorious home heaven will be to those who have loved
   the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity! Here we live by faith in Him, and
   find peace, though we see Him not. There we shall see Him face to face,
   and find He is altogether lovely. "Better" indeed will be the "sight of
   the eyes than the wandering of the desire!" (Eccles. vi. 9.)

   But alas, how little fit for heaven are many who talk of "going to
   heaven" when they die, while they manifestly have no saving faith, and
   no real acquaintance with Christ. You give Christ no honour here. You
   have no communion with Him. You do not love Him. Alas! what could you
   do in heaven? It would be no place for you. Its joys would be no joys
   for you. Its happiness would be a happiness into which you could not
   enter. Its employments would be a weariness and a burden to your heart.
   Oh, repent and change before it be too late!

   I trust I have shown how deep are the foundations of that little
   expression, "Christ is all."

   I might easily add to the things I have said, if space permitted. The
   subject is not exhausted. I have barely walked over the surface of it.
   There are mines of precious truth connected with it which I have left
   unopened.

   I might show how Christ ought to be all in a visible Church. Splendid
   religious buildings, numerous religious services, gorgeous ceremonies,
   troops of ordained men, all, all are nothing in the sight of God, if
   the Lord Jesus Himself in all His offices is not honoured, magnified,
   and exalted. That Church is but a dead carcase in which Christ is not
   "all."

   I might show how Christ ought to be all in a ministry. The great work
   which ordained men are intended to do, is to lift up Christ. We are to
   be like the pole on which the brazen serpent was hung. We are useful so
   long as we exalt the great object of faith, but useful no further. We
   are to be ambassadors to carry tidings to a rebellious world about the
   King's Son, and if we teach men to think more about us and our office
   than about Him, we are not fit for our place. The Spirit will never
   honour that minister who does not testify of Christ--who does not make
   Christ "all."

   I might show how language seems exhausted in the Bible, in describing
   Christ's various offices. I might describe how figures seem endless
   which are employed in unfolding Christ's fulness. The High Priest, the
   Mediator, the Redeemer, the Saviour, the Advocate, the Shepherd, the
   Physician, the Bridegroom, the Head, the Bread of Life, the Light of
   the World, the Way, the Door, the Vine, the Rock, the Fountain, the Sun
   of Righteousness, the Forerunner, the Surety, the Captain, the Prince
   of Life, the Amen, the Almighty, the Author and Finisher of Faith, the
   Lamb of God, the King of Saints, the Wonderful, the Mighty God, the
   Counsellor, the Bishop of Souls--all these, and many more, are names
   given to Christ in Scripture. Each is a fountain of instruction and
   comfort for everyone who is willing to drink of it. Each supplies
   matter for useful meditation.

   But I trust I have said enough to throw light on the point I want to
   impress on the minds of all who read this paper. I trust I have said
   enough to show the immense importance of the practical conclusions with
   which I now desire to finish the subject.

   (1) Is Christ all? Then let us learn the utter uselessness of a
   christless religion.

   There are only too many baptized men and women who practically know
   nothing at all about Christ. Their religion consists in a few vague
   notions and empty expressions. "They trust they are no worse than
   others. They keep to their church. They try to do their duty. They do
   nobody any harm. They hope God will be merciful to them. They trust the
   Almighty will pardon their sins, and take them to heaven when they
   die." This is about the whole of their religion!

   But what do these people know practically about Christ? Nothing:
   nothing at all! What experimental acquaintance have they with His
   offices and work, His blood, His righteousness, His mediation, His
   priesthood, His intercession? None: none at all! Ask them about a
   saving faith--ask them about being born again of the Spirit--ask them
   about being sanctified in Christ Jesus. What answer will you get? You
   are a barbarian to them. You have asked them simple Bible questions.
   But they know no more about them experimentally than a Buddhist or a
   Turk. And yet this is the religion of hundreds and thousands of people
   who are called Christians, all over the world!

   If any reader of this paper is a man of this kind, I warn him plainly
   that such Christianity will never take him to heaven. It may do very
   well in the eye of man. It may pass muster very decently at the
   vestry-meeting, in the place of business, in the House of Commons, or
   in the streets. But it will never comfort you. It will never satisfy
   your conscience. It will never save your soul.

   I warn you plainly that all notions and theories about God being
   merciful without Christ, and excepting through Christ, are baseless
   delusions and empty fancies. Such theories are as purely an idol of
   man's invention as the idol of Juggernaut. They are all of the earth,
   earthy. They never came down from heaven. The God of heaven has sealed
   and appointed Christ as the one only Saviour and way of life, and all
   who would be saved must be content to be saved by Him, or they will
   never be saved at all.

   Let every reader take notice. I give you fair warning this day. A
   religion without Christ will never save your soul.

   (2) Let me say another thing. Is Christ all? Then LEARN THE ENORMOUS
   FOLLY OF JOINING ANYTHING WITH CHRIST IN THE MATTER OF SALVATION.

   There are multitudes of baptized men and women who profess to honour
   Christ, but in reality do Him great dishonour. They give Christ a
   certain place in their system of religion, but not the place which God
   intended Him to fill. Christ alone is not "all in all" to their
   souls.--No! It is either Christ and the Church--or Christ and the
   sacraments--or Christ and His ordained ministers--or Christ and their
   own repentance--or Christ and their own goodness--or Christ and their
   own prayers--or Christ and their own sincerity and charity, on which
   they practically rest their souls.

   If any reader of this paper is a Christian of this kind, I warn him
   also plainly, that his religion is an offence to God. You are changing
   God's plan of salvation into a plan of your own devising. You are in
   effect deposing Christ from His throne, by giving the glory due to Him
   to another.

   I care not who it is that teaches such religion and on whose word you
   build. Whether he be Pope or Cardinal, Archbishop or Bishop, Dean or
   Archdeacon, Presbyter or Deacon, Episcopalian or Presbyterian, Baptist
   or Independent, Wesleyan or Plymouth brother, whosoever adds anything
   to Christ teaches you wrong.

   I care not what it is that you add to Christ. Whether it be the
   necessity of joining the Church of Rome, or of being an Episcopalian,
   or of becoming a Free Churchman, or of giving up the Liturgy, or of
   being dipped--whatever you may practically add to Christ in the matter
   of salvation, you do Christ an injury.

   Take heed what you are doing. Beware of giving to Christ's servants the
   honour due to none but Christ. Beware of giving the Lord's ordinances
   the honour due unto the Lord. Beware of resting the burden of your soul
   on anything but Christ, and Christ alone.

   (3) Let me say another thing. Is Christ all? Then LET ALL WHO WANT TO
   BE SAVED, APPLY DIRECT TO CHRIST.

   There are many who hear of Christ with the ear and believe all they are
   told about Him. They allow that there is no salvation excepting in
   Christ. They acknowledge that Jesus alone can deliver them from hell
   and present them faultless before God.

   But they seem never to get beyond this general acknowledgment. They
   never fairly lay hold on Christ for their own souls. They stick fast in
   a state of wishing, and wanting, and feeling, and intending, and never
   get any further. They see what we mean: they know it is all true. They
   hope one day to get full benefit of it: but at present they get no
   benefit whatever. The world is their "all." Politics are their "all."
   Pleasure is their "all." Business is their "all." But Christ is not
   their all.

   If any reader of this paper is a man of this kind, I warn him also
   plainly, he is in a bad state of soul. You are as truly in the way to
   hell in your present condition, as Judas Iscariot, or Ahab, or Cain.
   Believe me, there must be actual faith in Christ, or else Christ died
   in vain so far as you are concerned. It is not looking at the bread
   that feeds the hungry man but the actual eating of it. It is not gazing
   on the lifeboat that saves the shipwrecked sailor, but actually getting
   into it. It is not knowing and believing that Christ is a Saviour that
   can save your soul, unless there are actual transactions between you
   and Christ. You must be able to say, "Christ is my Saviour, because I
   have come to Him by faith, and taken Him for my own."--"Much of
   religion," said Luther, "turns on being able to use possessive
   pronouns. Take from me the word my.' and you take from me God!"

   Hear the advice I give you this day, and act upon it at once. Stand
   still no longer, waiting for some imaginary frames and feelings which
   will never come. Hesitate no longer under the idea that you must first
   of all obtain the Spirit and then come to Christ. Arise and come to
   Christ just as you are. He waits for you, and is as willing to save as
   He is mighty. He is the appointed Physician for sin-sick souls. Deal
   with Him as you would with your doctor about the cure of a disease of
   your body. Make a direct application to Him and tell Him all your
   wants. Take with you words this day, and cry mightily to the Lord Jesus
   for pardon and peace, as the thief did on the cross. Do as that man
   did: cry, "Lord, remember me." (Luke xxiii. 42.) Tell Him you have
   heard that He receives sinners, and that you are such. Tell Him you
   want to be saved and ask Him to save you. Rest not till you have
   actually tasted for yourself that the Lord is gracious. Do this and you
   shall find, sooner or later, if you are really in earnest, that "Christ
   is all."

   (4) One more thing let me add. Is Christ all? Then LET ALL HIS
   CONVERTED PEOPLE DEAL WITH HIM AS IF THEY REALLY BELIEVED IT. LET THEM
   LEAN ON HIM AND TRUST HIM FAR MORE THAN THEY HAVE EVER DONE YET.

   Alas, there are many of the Lord's people who live far below their
   privileges! There are many truly Christian souls who rob themselves of
   their own peace, and forsake their own mercies. There are many who
   insensibly join their own faith, or the work of the Spirit in their own
   hearts, to Christ, and so miss the fullness of Gospel peace. There are
   many who make little progress in their pursuit of holiness, and shine
   with a very dim light. And why is all this? Simply because in nineteen
   cases out of twenty men do not make Christ all in all.

   Now I call on every reader of this paper who is a believer, I beseech
   him for his own sake, to make sure that Christ is really and thoroughly
   his all in all. Beware of allowing yourself to mingle anything of your
   own with Christ.

   Have you faith? It is a priceless blessing. Happy indeed are they who
   are willing and ready to trust Jesus. But take heed you do not make a
   Christ of your faith. Rest not on your own faith, but on Christ.

   Is the work of the Spirit in your soul? Thank God for it. It is a work
   that shall never be overthrown. But oh, beware, lest, unaware to
   yourself, you make a Christ of the work of the Spirit! Rest not on the
   work of the Spirit, but on Christ.

   Have you any inward feelings of religion and experience of grace. Thank
   God for it. Thousands have no more religious feeling than a cat or dog.
   But oh, beware lest you make a Christ of your feelings and sensations!
   They are poor, uncertain things and sadly dependent on our bodies and
   outward circumstances. Rest only on Christ.

   Learn, I entreat you, to look more and more at the great object of
   faith, Jesus Christ, and to keep your mind dwelling on Him. So doing
   you would find faith, and all the other graces, grow, though the growth
   at the time might be imperceptible to yourself. He that would prove a
   skilful archer must not look at the arrow, but at the mark.

   Alas, I fear there is a great piece of pride and unbelief still
   sticking in the hearts of many believers! Few seem to realize how much
   they need a Saviour. Few seem to understand how thoroughly they are
   indebted to Him. Few seem to comprehend how much they need Him every
   day. Few seem to feel how simply and like a child they ought to hang
   their souls on Him. Few seem to be aware how full of love He is to His
   poor, weak people, and how ready to help them! And few therefore seem
   to know the peace, and joy, and strength, and power to live a godly
   life, which is to be had in Christ.

   Change you plan, reader, if your conscience tells you you are guilty:
   change your plan, and learn to trust Christ more. Physicians love to
   see patients coming to consult them: it is their office to receive the
   sickly and, if possible, to effect cures. The advocate loves to be
   employed: it is his calling. The husband loves his wife to trust him
   and lean upon him: it is his delight to cherish her and promote her
   comfort. And Christ loves His people to lean on Him, to rest in Him, to
   call on Him, to abide in Him.

   Let us all learn and strive to do so more and more. Let us live on
   Christ. Let us live in Christ. Let us live with Christ. Let us live to
   Christ. So doing, we shall prove that we fully realize that "Christ is
   all." So doing, we shall feel great peace, and attain more of that
   "holiness without which no man shall see the Lord." (Heb. xii. 14.)
     __________________________________________________________________

XXI
EXTRACTS FROM OLD WRITERS

   THE passages I append from Traill and Brooks on the subject of Holiness
   appear to me so valuable that I make no apology for introducing them.

   They are the product of an age when, I am obliged to say, experimental
   religion was more deeply studied and far better understood than it is
   now.

   (I.) Reverend Robert Trail, sometime Minister of Cranbrook, Kent. 1696.

   "Concerning sanctification, there are three things that I would speak
   to.

   "I. What sanctification is.

   "II. Wherein it agrees with justification.

   "III. Wherein it differs from justification.

   "I. What is sanctification? It is a great deal better to feel it than
   to express it,

   "Sanctification is the same with regeneration; the same with the
   renovation of the whole man. Sanctification is the forming and the
   framing of the new creature; it is the implanting and engraving the
   image of Christ upon the poor soul. It is what the Apostle breathed
   after--'That Christ might be formed in them' (Gal. iv. 19); That they
   might bear the image of the heavenly." (1 Cor. xv. 49)

   "There are but two men only that all the world is like; and so will it
   fare with them, as they are like the one, or like the other: the first
   Adam, and the second Adam. Every man by nature is like the first Adam
   and like the devil: for the devil and the first fallen Adam were like
   one another. Ye are of your father the devil.' saith our Lord (John
   viii. 44), and he was a murderer from the beginning.' All the children
   of the first Adam are the devil's children, there is no difference
   here. And all the children of the other sort are like to Jesus Christ,
   the second Adam; and when His image shall be perfected in them, then
   they shall be perfectly happy. As we have also borne the image of the
   earthly, so shall we also bear the image of the heavenly.' (1 Cor. xv.
   49.) Pray observe; we bear the image of the earthly by being born in
   sin and misery; we bear the image of the earthly by living in sin and
   misery; and we bear the image of the earthly by dying in sin and
   misery; and we bear the image of the earthly in the rottenness of the
   grave; and we bear the image of the heavenly Adam when we are
   sanctified by His Spirit. This image increases in us according to our
   growth in sanctification: and we perfectly bear the image of the
   heavenly Adam when we are just like the Man Christ, both in soul and
   body, perfectly happy, and perfectly holy; when we have overcome death
   by His grace, as He overcame it by His own strength. It will never be
   known how like believers are to Jesus Christ, till they are risen
   again: when they shall arise from their graves, like so many little
   suns shining in glory and brightness. Oh, how like will they be to
   Jesus Christ! though His personal transcendent glory will be His
   property and prerogative to all eternity.

   "II. Wherein are justification and sanctification alike? I answer, in
   many things.

   " 1st. They are like one another as they are the same in their author;
   it is God that justifieth, and it is God that sanctifies. Who shall lay
   anything to the charge of God's elect? it is God that justifieth.'
   (Rom. viii. 33.) I am the Lord that doth sanctify you, is a common word
   in the Old Testament. (Ex. xxxi. 13; Lev. xx. 8.)

   "2ndly. They are alike and the same in their rise, being both of free
   grace; justification is an act of free grace, and sanctification is the
   same. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according
   to His mercy, He saved us by the washing of regeneration, and the
   renewing of the Holy Ghost.' (Tit. iii. 5.) They are both of grace.

   "3rdly. They are alike in that they are both towards the same persons.
   Never a man is justified but he is also sanctified; and never a man is
   sanctified but he is also justified; all the elect of God, all the
   redeemed, have both these blessings passing upon them.

   "4thly. They are alike as to the time, they are the same in time. It is
   a hard matter for us to talk or think of time when we are speaking of
   the works of God: these saving works of His are always done at the same
   time; a man is not justified before he is sanctified, though it may be
   conceived so in order of nature, yet at the same time the same grace
   works both. Such were some of you,' saith the Apostle, but ye are
   washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the
   Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.' (1 Cor. vi. 11.)

   "5thly. They are the same as to the operation of them by the same
   means, that is, by the Word of God: we are justified by the Word,
   sentencing us to eternal life by the promise; and we are also
   sanctified by the power of the same Word. Now ye are clean,' saith our
   Lord, through the Word that I have spoken unto you.' (John xv. 3.) That
   He might sanctify and cleanse His Church,' saith the Apostle, with the
   washing of water by the Word.' (Eph. v. 26.)

   "6th and lastly. They are the same as to their equal necessity to
   eternal life. I do not say as to their equal order, but as to their
   equal necessity: that is, as it is determined that no man who is not
   justified shall be saved, so it is determined that no man who is not
   sanctified shall be saved: no unjustified man can be saved, and no
   unsanctified man can be saved. They are of equal necessity in order to
   the possessing of eternal life.

   "III. Wherein do justification and sanctification differ? This is a
   matter of great concernment for people's practice and daily exercise;
   wherein they differ. They agree in many things, as has just now been
   declared, but they likewise differ vastly.

   "1st. Justification is an act of God about the state of a man's person;
   but sanctification is the work of God about the nature of a man: and
   these two are very different, as I shall illustrate by a similitude.
   Justification is an act of God as a judge about a delinquent, absolving
   him from a sentence of death; but sanctification is an act of God about
   us, as a physician, in curing us of a mortal disease. There is a
   criminal that conies to the bar, and is arraigned for high treason; the
   same criminal has a mortal disease, that he may die of, though there
   was no judge on the bench to pass the sentence of death upon him for
   his crime. It is an act of grace which absolves the man from the
   sentence of the law, that he shall not suffer death for his
   treason--that saves the man's life. But notwithstanding this, unless
   his disease be cured, he may die quickly after, for all the judge's
   pardon. Therefore, I say, justification is an act of God as a gracious
   Judge, sanctification is a work of God as a merciful Physician; David
   joins them both together. (Ps. ciii. 3.) Who forgiveth all thine
   inqiuities, who healeth all thy diseases.' It is promised, That
   iniquity shall not be your ruin (Ezek. xviii. 30), in the guilt of it;
   that is justification: and it shall not be your ruin, in the power of
   it; there lies sanctification.

   "2ndly. Justification is an act of God's grace upon the account of the
   righteousness of another, but sanctification is a work of God, infusing
   a righteousness into us. Now there is a great difference between these
   two: for the one is by imputation, the other by infusion.

   "In justification, the sentence of God proceeds this way: the
   righteousness that Christ wrought out by His life and death, and the
   obedience that He paid to the law of God, is reckoned to the guilty
   sinner for his absolution; so that when a sinner comes to stand at
   God's bar, when the question is asked, Hath not this man broken the law
   of God? Yes, saith God; yes, saith the conscience of the poor sinner, I
   have broken it in innumerable ways. And doth not the law condemn thee
   to die for thy transgression? Yes, saith the man; yes, saith the law of
   God, the law knows nothing more but this; the soul that sinneth must
   die.' Well, then, but Is there no hope in this case? Yes, and Gospel
   grace reveals this hope. There is One that took sin on Him, and died
   for our sins, and His righteousness is reckoned for the poor sinner's
   justification; and thus we are absolved. We are absolved in
   justification by God's reckoning on our account, on our behalf, and for
   our advantage, what Christ hath done and suffered for us.

   "In sanctification the Spirit of God infuses a holiness into the soul.
   I do not say He infuses a righteousness; for I would fain have these
   words, righteousness and holiness, better distinguished than generally
   they are. Righteousness and holiness are, in this case, to be kept
   vastly asunder. Our righteousness is without us; our holiness is within
   us, it is our own; the Apostle plainly makes that distinction. Not
   having mine own righteousness.' (Phil. iii. 9.) It is our own, not
   originally, but our own inherently; not our own so us to be of our own
   working, but our own because it is indwelling in us. But our
   righteousness is neither our own originally nor inherently; it is
   neither wrought out by us, nor doth it dwell in us; but it is wrought
   out by Jesus Christ, and it eternally dwells in Him, and is only to be
   pleaded by faith, by a poor creature. But our holiness, though it be
   not our own originally, yet it is our own inherently, it dwells in us:
   this is the distinction that the Apostle makes. That I may be found in
   Him, not having my own righteousness, which is of the law, but that
   which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God
   by faith.' (Phil. iii. 9.)

   "3rdly. Justification is perfect, but sanctification is imperfect; and
   here lies a great difference between them. Justification, I say, is
   perfect, and admits of no degrees; admits of no decays, admits of no
   intermission, nor of any interruption: but sanctification admits of all
   these. When I say justification is perfect, I mean, that every
   justified man is equally and perfectly justified. The poorest believer
   that is this day in the world, is justified as much as ever the Apostle
   Paul was; and every true believer is as much justified now as he will
   be a thousand years hence. Justification is perfect in all them that
   are partakers of it, and to all eternity; it admits of no degrees. And
   the plain reason of it is this--the ground of it is the perfect
   righteousness of Jesus Christ, and the entitling us to it is by an act
   of God the gracious Judge, and that act stands for ever; and if God
   justifies, who is he that shall condemn? (Rom. viii. 33.) But
   sanctification is an imperfect, incomplete, changeable thing. One
   believer is more sanctified than another. I am apt to believe that the
   Apostle Paul was more sanctified the first hour of his conversion, than
   any man this day in the world.

   "Sanctification differs greatly as to the persons that are partakers of
   it; and it differs greatly too as to the same man; for a true believer,
   a truly sanctified man, may be more holy and sanctified at one time
   than at another. There is a work required of us--to be perfecting
   holiness in the fear of God (2 Cor. vii. 1). But we are nowhere
   required to be perfecting righteousness in the sight of God; for God
   hath brought in a perfect righteousness, in which we stand; but we are
   to take care, and to give diligence to perfect holiness in the fear of
   God. A saint in glory is more sanctified than ever he was, for he is
   perfectly so; but he is not more justified than he was. Nay, a saint in
   heaven is not more justified than a believer on earth is: only they
   know it better, and the glory of that light in which they see it,
   discovers it more brightly and more clearly to them."

   From Traill's Sermons, upon 1 Pet. i. 1-3, vol. 4, p. 71. Edinburgh
   edition of Traill's Works. 1810.

   (2.) Rev. Thomas Brooks, Rector of St. Margaret, Fish Street Hill,
   London. 1662.

   "Consider the necessity of holiness. It is impossible that ever you
   should be happy, except you are holy. No holiness here, no happiness
   hereafter. The Scripture speaks of three bodily inhabitants of
   heaven--Enoch, before the law; Elijah, under the law; and Jesus Christ,
   under the Gospel: all three eminent in holiness, to teach us, that even
   in an ordinary course there is no going to heaven without holiness.
   There are many thousand thousands now in heaven, but not one unholy one
   among them all; there is not one sinner among all those saints; not one
   goat among all those sheep; not one weed among all those flowers; not
   one thorn or prickle among all those roses; not one pebble among all
   those glistering diamonds. There is not one Cain among all those Abels;
   nor one Ishmael among all those Isaacs; nor one Esau among all those
   Jacobs in heaven. There is not one Ham among all the patriarchs; not
   one Saul among all the prophets; nor one Judas among all the apostles;
   nor one Demas among all the preachers; nor one Simon Magus among all
   the professors.

   "Heaven is only for the holy man, and the holy man is only for heaven:
   heaven is a garment of glory, that is only suited to him that is holy.
   God, who is truth itself, and cannot lie, hath said it, that without
   holiness no man shall see the Lord. Mark that word no man.' Without
   holiness the rich man shall not see the Lord; without holiness the poor
   man shall not see the Lord; without holiness the nobleman shall not see
   the Lord; without holiness the mean man shall not see the Lord; without
   holiness the prince shall not see the Lord; without holiness the
   peasant shall not see the Lord; without holiness the ruler shall not
   see the Lord; without holiness the ruled shall not see the Lord;
   without holiness the learned man shall not see the Lord; without
   holiness the ignorant man shall not see the Lord; without holiness the
   husband shall not see the Lord; without holiness the wife shall not see
   the Lord; without holiness the father shall not see the Lord; without
   holiness the child shall not see the Lord; without holiness the master
   shall not see the Lord; without holiness the servant shall not see the
   Lord. For faithful and strong is the Lord of hosts that hath spoken
   it.' (Josh. xxiii. 14.)

   "In this day some cry up one form, some another; some cry up one Church
   state, some another; some cry up one way, some another; but certainly
   the way of holiness is the good old way (Jer. vi. 16); it is the King
   of kings' highway to heaven and happiness: And a highway shall be
   there, and a way, and it shall be called The way of holiness; the
   unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be for those: the
   wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein.' (Isa. xxxv. 8.)
   Some men say, Lo, here is the way; other men say, Lo, there is the way;
   but certainly the way of holiness is the surest, the safest, the
   easiest, the noblest, and the shortest way to happiness.

   "Among the heathen, no man could enter into the temple of honour, but
   must first enter the temple of virtue. There is no entering the temple
   of happiness, except you enter into the temple of holiness. Holiness
   must first enter into you, before you can enter into God's holy hill.
   As Samson cried out, Give me water, or I die'; or as Rachel cried out,
   Give me children, or I die'; so all unsanctified souls may well cry
   out, Lord, give me holiness, or I die: give me holiness or I eternally
   die. If the angels, those princes of glory, fall once from their
   holiness, they shall be for ever excluded from everlasting happiness
   and blessedness. If Adam in paradise fall from his purity, he shall
   quickly be driven out from the presence of Divine glory. Augustine
   would not be a wicked man, an unholy man, one hour for all the world,
   because he did not know but that he might die that hour; and should he
   die in an unholy estate, he knew he should be for ever separated from
   the presence of the Lord and the glory of His power.

   "O, sirs, do not deceive your own souls; holiness is of absolute
   necessity; without it you shall never see the Lord. (2 Thess. i. 8-10.)
   It is not absolutely necessary that you should be great or rich in the
   world; but it is absolutely necessary that you should be holy: it is
   not absolutely necessary that you should enjoy health, strength,
   friends, liberty, life; but it is absolutely necessary that you should
   be holy. A man may see the Lord without worldly prosperity, but he can
   never see the Lord except he be holy. A man may to heaven, to
   happiness, without honour or worldly glory, but he can never to heaven,
   to happiness, without holiness. Without holiness here, no heaven
   hereafter. And there shall in no wise enter into it anything that
   defileth.' (Rev. xxi. 27.) God will at last shut the gates of glory
   against every person that is without heart-purity.

   "Ah, sirs, holiness is a flower that grows not in Nature's garden. Men
   are not born with holiness in their hearts, as they are born with
   tongues in their mouths: holiness is of a Divine offspring: it is a
   pearl of price, that is to be found in no nature but a renewed nature,
   m no bosom but a sanctified bosom. There is not the least beam or spark
   of holiness in any natural man in the world. Every imagination of the
   thoughts of man's heart is only evil continually.' (Gen. vi. 5.) How
   can man be clean that is born of a woman?' (Job xxv. 4.) The
   interrogation carries in it a strong negation, How can man be clean?'
   that is, man cannot be clean that is born of a woman: a man that is
   born of a woman is born in sin, and born both under wrath and under the
   curse. And who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?' But we are
   all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy
   rags.' (Job xiv. 4; Isa. lxiv. 6.) There is none righteous, no not one;
   there is none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after
   God.' (Rom. iii. 10, 11.) Every man by nature is a stranger, yea, an
   enemy to holiness. (Rom. viii. 7.) Every man that comes into this world
   comes with his face towards sin and hell, and with his back upon God
   and holiness.

   "Such is the corruption of our nature, that, propound any Divine good
   to it, it is entertained as fire by water, or wet wood, with hissing.
   Propound any evil, then it is like fire to straw; it is like the
   foolish satyr that made haste to kiss the fire; it is like that
   unctuous matter which, the naturalists say, sucks and snatches the fire
   to it, with which it is consumed. All men are born sinners, and there
   is nothing but an infinite power that can make them saints. All men
   would be happy, and yet they naturally loathe to be holy. By all which
   you may clearly see that food is not more necessary for the
   preservation of natural life, than holiness is necessary for the
   preservation and salvation of the soul. If a man had the wisdom of
   Solomon, the strength of Samson, the courage of Joshua, the policy of
   Ahithophel, the dignities of Haman, the power of Ahasuerus, and the
   eloquence of Apollos, yet all those without holiness would never save
   him. The days and times wherein we live call aloud for holiness. If you
   look upon them as days and times of grace, what greater and higher
   engagements to holiness were ever put upon a people, than those that
   God hath put upon us, who enjoy so many ways, means, and helps to make
   us holy? Oh, the pains, the care, the cost, the charge, that God hath
   been at, and that God is daily at, to make us holy! Hath He not sent,
   and doth He not still send His messengers, rising up early, and going
   to bed late, and all to provoke you to be holy? Have not many of them
   spent their time, and spent their strength, and spent their spirits,
   and spent their lives to make you holy? O, sirs, what do holy
   ordinances call for, but holy hearts and holy lives? What do days of
   light call for, but walking in the light, and casting off the deeds of
   darkness? What is the voice of all the means of grace, but this, Oh,
   labour to be gracious? And what is the voice of the Holy Spirit, but
   this, Oh, labour to be holy? And what is the voice of all the miracles
   of mercy that God hath wrought in the midst of you, but this, Be ye
   holy, be ye holy'? O, sirs, what could the Lord have done that He hath
   not done to make you holy? Hath He not lifted you up to heaven in
   respect of holy helps? Hath He not to this very day followed you close
   with holy offers, and holy entreaties, and holy counsels, and holy
   encouragements, and all to make you holy? And will you be loose still,
   and proud still, and worldly still, and malicious still, and envious
   still, and contentious still, and unholy still? Oh, what is this, but
   to provoke the Lord to put out all the lights of heaven, to drive your
   teachers into corners, to remove your candlesticks, and to send His
   everlasting Gospel, that hath stood long a tip-toe, among a people that
   may more highly prize it, and dearly love it, and stoutly defend it,
   and conscientiously practise it, than you have done to this very day?
   (Rev. ii. 4, 5; Isa. xlii. 25.) I suppose there is nothing more evident
   than that the times and seasons wherein we live call aloud upon every
   one to look after holiness, and to labour for holiness. Never complain
   of the times, but cease to do evil, and labour to do well, and all will
   be well; get but better hearts and better lives, and you will quickly
   see better times. (Isa. i. 16-19.)

   From Brooks' "Crown and Glory of Christianity; or, Holiness the only
   way to Happiness"--Brooks' Works, vol. 4, pp. 151-153,
   187-188.--Grosart's edition. 1866.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1:3   [2]3:1-24   [3]3:15   [4]6:5   [5]6:5   [6]13:9   [7]13:10
   [8]13:12   [9]14:12   [10]14:12   [11]18:25   [12]18:27   [13]19:9
   [14]19:13   [15]19:13   [16]19:14   [17]19:14   [18]19:15   [19]19:16
   [20]19:17   [21]19:17   [22]32:10   [23]49:10

   Exodus

   [24]3:2   [25]31:13   [26]34:29

   Leviticus

   [27]4:1-35   [28]5:14-19   [29]20:8

   Numbers

   [30]10:29   [31]12:3   [32]15:25-29   [33]21:5   [34]24:13

   Deuteronomy

   [35]11:21

   Joshua

   [36]23:14

   1 Samuel

   [37]2:3   [38]15:22-23   [39]20:3   [40]27:1

   2 Samuel

   [41]16:10   [42]23:5

   1 Kings

   [43]10:7   [44]18:39   [45]19:12   [46]21:20   [47]22:8

   2 Kings

   [48]4:7   [49]4:26   [50]5:12   [51]7:2

   1 Chronicles

   [52]12:32

   2 Chronicles

   [53]3:4   [54]4:1   [55]25:16   [56]31:21   [57]32:31

   Nehemiah

   [58]5:15

   Esther

   [59]1:13

   Job

   [60]1:7   [61]3:17   [62]8:9   [63]13:15   [64]13:24   [65]14:4
   [66]15:11   [67]15:15   [68]15:18   [69]19:25   [70]19:25-26
   [71]20:5   [72]20:12-13   [73]23:13   [74]25:4   [75]33:27-28
   [76]35:10   [77]40:4   [78]42:6

   Psalms

   [79]2:8   [80]4:4   [81]4:7   [82]4:8   [83]9:13   [84]9:17
   [85]9:17   [86]16:11   [87]17:15   [88]17:15   [89]22:6   [90]22:6
   [91]22:14   [92]22:15   [93]23:4   [94]25:14   [95]30:6   [96]35:27
   [97]35:27   [98]42:8   [99]50:23   [100]51:6   [101]51:12   [102]62:5
   [103]63:8   [104]73:26   [105]88:3   [106]93:4   [107]94:19
   [108]103:3   [109]103:13   [110]103:13   [111]107:7   [112]107:18
   [113]119:57   [114]119:91   [115]119:104   [116]119:128
   [117]119:128   [118]119:136   [119]119:158   [120]119:165
   [121]119:165   [122]124:5

   Proverbs

   [123]1:22-23   [124]1:26   [125]2:25   [126]3:17   [127]4:8
   [128]4:19   [129]8:23   [130]8:27-30   [131]13:4   [132]13:4
   [133]13:4   [134]13:4   [135]13:7   [136]13:15   [137]15:3
   [138]16:24   [139]28:14   [140]31:6

   Ecclesiastes

   [141]3:4   [142]3:7   [143]6:9   [144]6:9   [145]7:6   [146]7:16
   [147]7:20   [148]9:4   [149]9:10   [150]12:6

   Song of Solomon

   [151]5:1   [152]5:10   [153]6:3   [154]6:13   [155]8:5

   Isaiah

   [156]1:6   [157]1:16   [158]1:16-19   [159]6:5   [160]10:15
   [161]11:9   [162]25:9   [163]26:3   [164]29:21   [165]32:17
   [166]35:8   [167]38:10   [168]40:11   [169]42:25   [170]43:2
   [171]43:13   [172]48:22   [173]53:3   [174]53:3   [175]53:3
   [176]55:1   [177]61:3   [178]63:1   [179]64:6   [180]66:13

   Jeremiah

   [181]2:13   [182]3:13   [183]3:22   [184]6:16   [185]15:19
   [186]17:9   [187]17:9   [188]44:4

   Lamentations

   [189]3:57

   Ezekiel

   [190]18:4   [191]18:30   [192]18:31

   Daniel

   [193]4:27   [194]6:5   [195]7:14   [196]9:25   [197]12:2   [198]12:4

   Hosea

   [199]14:5   [200]14:1642

   Habakkuk

   [201]1:13   [202]3:17-18

   Zephaniah

   [203]1:12

   Zechariah

   [204]2:8

   Malachi

   [205]2:9   [206]4:2

   Matthew

   [207]4:1-10   [208]5:11   [209]5:11-12   [210]5:12   [211]5:20
   [212]5:20   [213]5:21-28   [214]5:28   [215]5:29-30   [216]5:47
   [217]5:48   [218]6:6   [219]7:14   [220]8:8   [221]10:16   [222]10:34
   [223]11:28   [224]11:28   [225]11:30   [226]12:20   [227]13:20
   [228]13:21   [229]13:23   [230]14:30   [231]16:3   [232]16:18
   [233]16:22   [234]16:26   [235]18:3   [236]21:16   [237]22:29
   [238]24:30   [239]25:32   [240]25:37   [241]25:37   [242]25:37-39
   [243]25:41-42   [244]25:46   [245]25:46   [246]27:46   [247]27:46
   [248]28:10   [249]28:18   [250]28:20

   Mark

   [251]4:37-40   [252]5:25   [253]5:26   [254]6:20   [255]6:20
   [256]6:52   [257]7:21   [258]8:36   [259]9:23-24   [260]9:24
   [261]9:34   [262]9:44   [263]14:38   [264]16:16   [265]16:16

   Luke

   [266]5:8   [267]6:26   [268]6:44   [269]6:44   [270]7:47   [271]9:45
   [272]9:54   [273]9:62   [274]11:21   [275]12:4   [276]12:5
   [277]12:48   [278]13:24   [279]14:25   [280]14:25-27   [281]14:25-27
   [282]14:28   [283]14:28   [284]15:20-23   [285]16:24   [286]16:25
   [287]17:5   [288]17:32   [289]17:32   [290]18:8   [291]18:13
   [292]18:13   [293]18:34   [294]19:44   [295]21:34   [296]22:28
   [297]22:31   [298]22:36   [299]23:39-43   [300]23:42   [301]23:42
   [302]23:42   [303]24:25

   John

   [304]1:1   [305]1:3   [306]1:3   [307]1:12   [308]1:12-13   [309]1:29
   [310]1:46   [311]2:12-14   [312]3:3   [313]3:6   [314]3:7   [315]3:14
   [316]3:15   [317]3:15-16   [318]3:16   [319]3:36   [320]3:36
   [321]4:3   [322]4:13   [323]4:14   [324]4:28-29   [325]5:21
   [326]5:22   [327]5:23   [328]5:23   [329]5:29   [330]5:40   [331]5:40
   [332]6:27   [333]6:27   [334]6:28-30   [335]6:35   [336]6:37
   [337]6:37   [338]6:37   [339]6:39   [340]6:55   [341]6:66
   [342]7:37-38   [343]7:48   [344]8:12   [345]8:31   [346]8:39
   [347]8:42   [348]8:42   [349]8:44   [350]8:44   [351]8:56   [352]9:35
   [353]9:37   [354]10:9   [355]10:28   [356]10:28   [357]10:28
   [358]10:28   [359]11:41-43   [360]13:34-35   [361]14:6   [362]14:6
   [363]14:15   [364]14:16   [365]14:19   [366]14:21   [367]14:23
   [368]14:24   [369]14:27   [370]14:27   [371]15:1   [372]15:2
   [373]15:3   [374]15:4-5   [375]15:5   [376]15:5   [377]15:5
   [378]15:8   [379]15:14   [380]15:14   [381]15:19   [382]15:20
   [383]15:26   [384]16:15   [385]16:24   [386]16:33   [387]17:2
   [388]17:3   [389]17:4   [390]17:5   [391]17:15   [392]17:17
   [393]17:17   [394]17:19   [395]17:24   [396]18:9   [397]18:9
   [398]21:15-17   [399]21:16   [400]21:17   [401]21:22

   Acts

   [402]2:37   [403]3:21   [404]4:11-12   [405]4:12   [406]5:31
   [407]5:31   [408]5:41   [409]5:41   [410]7:22   [411]7:22   [412]7:56
   [413]7:59   [414]8:21   [415]8:37   [416]9:11   [417]9:20   [418]9:36
   [419]10:44   [420]16:30   [421]16:30-31   [422]16:31   [423]18:17
   [424]20:27-35   [425]20:32   [426]20:35   [427]24:16   [428]26:18

   Romans

   [429]1:6   [430]2:16   [431]3:10-11   [432]3:20   [433]3:20-28
   [434]3:26   [435]4:5   [436]4:5   [437]4:5   [438]5:1   [439]6:9
   [440]6:13-19   [441]6:14   [442]6:23   [443]7:7   [444]7:21
   [445]7:22   [446]7:22   [447]7:22   [448]7:23-24   [449]7:24
   [450]7:24   [451]7:24   [452]8:7   [453]8:7   [454]8:9   [455]8:9
   [456]8:10   [457]8:14   [458]8:14   [459]8:22   [460]8:29   [461]8:29
   [462]8:29   [463]8:29   [464]8:33   [465]8:33   [466]8:33-34
   [467]8:37   [468]8:37   [469]8:37   [470]8:38   [471]8:38-39
   [472]9:2-3   [473]9:6   [474]9:16   [475]10:9   [476]10:9-11
   [477]10:11   [478]12:1   [479]12:1   [480]12:2   [481]12:11
   [482]13:8   [483]14:7   [484]16:20   [485]16:26

   1 Corinthians

   [486]1:17   [487]1:21   [488]1:30   [489]2:14   [490]2:14   [491]3:6
   [492]3:8   [493]3:11   [494]3:15   [495]6:11   [496]6:20   [497]9:16
   [498]9:22   [499]9:26   [500]9:27   [501]9:27   [502]10:4
   [503]10:12   [504]12:28   [505]13:1-13   [506]14:8   [507]15:9
   [508]15:9   [509]15:33   [510]15:49   [511]15:49   [512]16:13
   [513]16:22

   2 Corinthians

   [514]3:2   [515]3:18   [516]3:18   [517]4:6   [518]4:17
   [519]4:17-18   [520]4:17-18   [521]5:1   [522]5:1   [523]5:6
   [524]5:10   [525]5:10   [526]5:15   [527]5:21   [528]6:14   [529]7:1
   [530]7:1   [531]7:1   [532]7:1   [533]7:11   [534]10:15   [535]12:15

   Galatians

   [536]2:16   [537]2:20   [538]2:20   [539]2:20   [540]2:20   [541]2:20
   [542]2:20   [543]2:20   [544]2:20   [545]2:20   [546]3:24   [547]4:19
   [548]4:19   [549]5:6   [550]5:6   [551]5:17   [552]5:17   [553]5:17
   [554]5:22   [555]5:22-23   [556]5:24   [557]5:25   [558]5:25
   [559]6:14   [560]6:14

   Ephesians

   [561]1:4   [562]1:4   [563]1:4   [564]2:3   [565]2:8-9   [566]2:12
   [567]2:12   [568]2:12   [569]2:14   [570]3:8   [571]3:8   [572]3:8
   [573]3:12   [574]3:17   [575]3:17   [576]4:14   [577]4:15   [578]4:16
   [579]5:25   [580]5:25-26   [581]5:26   [582]6:11   [583]6:11-13
   [584]6:13-17   [585]6:16   [586]6:24   [587]6:24

   Philippians

   [588]1:6   [589]1:9   [590]1:18   [591]1:21   [592]1:21   [593]1:21
   [594]1:21   [595]1:21   [596]1:23   [597]1:23   [598]2:1   [599]2:6
   [600]2:6-8   [601]2:10-11   [602]3:9   [603]3:9   [604]3:12
   [605]3:12   [606]3:13   [607]3:13   [608]3:14   [609]4:4   [610]4:11
   [611]4:13   [612]4:13   [613]4:13   [614]4:13   [615]4:13

   Colossians

   [616]1:10   [617]1:16   [618]1:17   [619]1:19   [620]1:19   [621]1:22
   [622]2:2   [623]2:6-7   [624]2:10   [625]3:5   [626]3:10   [627]3:11
   [628]3:11   [629]3:20   [630]3:23

   1 Thessalonians

   [631]1:3-4   [632]3:12   [633]4:1   [634]4:1   [635]4:1   [636]4:1
   [637]4:3   [638]4:3   [639]4:3   [640]4:10

   2 Thessalonians

   [641]1:3   [642]1:8   [643]1:8-10   [644]2:13

   1 Timothy

   [645]1:8   [646]1:8   [647]1:15   [648]1:15   [649]1:15
   [650]1:18-19   [651]2:6   [652]2:7   [653]4:16   [654]6:12   [655]6:12

   2 Timothy

   [656]1:11   [657]1:12   [658]1:12   [659]1:12   [660]2:3   [661]2:4
   [662]2:26   [663]3:1-2   [664]3:13   [665]4:2   [666]4:6-8   [667]4:8
   [668]4:10   [669]4:17

   Titus

   [670]1:1   [671]1:3   [672]1:16   [673]2:10   [674]2:13   [675]2:14
   [676]2:14   [677]3:5

   Hebrews

   [678]1   [679]1:10   [680]2   [681]2:10   [682]2:11   [683]2:18
   [684]3:13   [685]3:13   [686]4:11   [687]4:14   [688]4:15   [689]4:15
   [690]6   [691]6:1   [692]6:1   [693]6:11   [694]6:11   [695]6:12
   [696]6:18   [697]6:19   [698]7:25   [699]7:25   [700]7:25
   [701]10:22   [702]10:24   [703]10:37   [704]11:2-27   [705]11:4
   [706]11:4   [707]11:5   [708]11:6   [709]11:10   [710]11:24-26
   [711]12   [712]12:1   [713]12:2   [714]12:2   [715]12:3   [716]12:10
   [717]12:11   [718]12:14   [719]12:14   [720]12:14   [721]12:14
   [722]12:14   [723]12:14   [724]12:29   [725]13:5   [726]13:8
   [727]13:16   [728]13:16   [729]13:17

   James

   [730]1:17   [731]1:17   [732]1:22   [733]2:10   [734]2:17   [735]2:17
   [736]2:17-20   [737]2:19   [738]2:21-25   [739]3:2   [740]3:2
   [741]4:4   [742]4:4   [743]4:4   [744]4:6   [745]4:6   [746]5:11

   1 Peter

   [747]1:1-3   [748]1:2   [749]1:2   [750]1:11   [751]1:15-16
   [752]1:20   [753]2:2   [754]2:2   [755]2:7   [756]2:21   [757]2:21-23
   [758]2:24   [759]2:24   [760]3:1   [761]3:1   [762]3:1   [763]3:4
   [764]3:15   [765]3:18   [766]3:18   [767]5:4   [768]5:5   [769]5:5
   [770]5:5   [771]5:8

   2 Peter

   [772]1:1   [773]1:1   [774]1:4   [775]1:4   [776]1:10   [777]1:10
   [778]1:10   [779]2:7-8   [780]2:8   [781]2:8   [782]2:8   [783]2:8
   [784]3:3   [785]3:13   [786]3:18   [787]3:18   [788]3:18

   1 John

   [789]1:7   [790]1:7   [791]2:3   [792]2:3   [793]2:6   [794]2:6
   [795]2:15   [796]2:15   [797]2:16   [798]2:29   [799]3:3   [800]3:3
   [801]3:3   [802]3:4   [803]3:4   [804]3:9   [805]3:9-14   [806]3:14
   [807]3:18   [808]3:18-19   [809]3:19   [810]3:22   [811]3:23
   [812]3:24   [813]4:19   [814]5:4   [815]5:4-18   [816]5:10-12
   [817]5:12   [818]5:13   [819]5:19   [820]5:19

   Jude

   [821]1:15

   Revelation

   [822]1:5   [823]1:5-6   [824]1:8   [825]2:4-5   [826]2:5   [827]3:17
   [828]3:17   [829]3:22   [830]5:6   [831]5:6   [832]5:12-13
   [833]7:13   [834]7:14   [835]7:17   [836]11:15   [837]12:6
   [838]12:11   [839]12:16   [840]14:13   [841]17:14   [842]19:9
   [843]20:13   [844]20:13   [845]21:7   [846]21:22-23   [847]21:23
   [848]21:27   [849]21:27   [850]21:27   [851]22:3   [852]22:4
</p>
</div>
</osisText>
</osis>